---
title: 'VI\. Appointment, Evaluation, Reappointment and Promotion'
---

::: {#body}
Health Programs

**VI. Appointment, Evaluation, Reappointment and Promotion**

::: {xmlns=""}
### A. Appointment Procedure
:::

The Academic Hiring Procedures apply to appointments in the Health
Programs Faculty Appointment System.

1\. Position Description

A detailed position description and specific criteria and procedures for
reappointment and promotion shall be provided to the Health Programs
faculty candidate, together with a copy of the letter of offer.

2\. Letter of Offer

The letter of offer for initial appointments shall include information
on 1) the length of the initial appointment, 2) the initial salary
level, and salary program, 3) the duties expected of the individual and
4) the opportunity for reappointments. A copy of the HP Handbook also
shall be provided.  

3\. Salaries

See Appendix A (Colleges of Human and Osteopathic Medicine), B (College
of Nursing), and C (College of Veterinary Medicine) for salary program
information.

Base salaries are paid in twelve monthly installments on the last
working day of each month for HP faculty with an annual (AN)
appointment. Base salaries for HP faculty with an academic year (AY)
appointment are paid on the last working day of each month over the duty
period, August 15 through May 15.

::: {xmlns=""}
### B. Annual Evaluation
:::

Health Programs faculty will be evaluated and provided feedback on their
performance by the applicable unit administrator. Written annual
evaluations are conducted as part of regular reviews related to
assignment, planning and salary adjustment.

::: {xmlns=""}
### C. Review for Reappointment
:::

In addition to an annual evaluation, HP faculty are formally reviewed
and evaluated for reappointment by the appropriate unit administrator,
with the advice of a body of the faculty member\'s peers (this body
shall include HP faculty members). This review process will be completed
at least 90 days prior to the end date of an individual's current HP
appointment.

Reappointment evaluations shall be based upon each HP faculty member\'s
specific duties and responsibilities and any additional job
responsibilities assigned and/or acquired since the initial appointment.
Each faculty member shall be notified when his/her evaluation is to take
place, what procedures are to be followed, and what criteria are to be
used in the evaluation. This evaluation will take place between the
faculty member and the applicable unit/department administrator.

The applicable unit administrator is required to seek advice on the
decision to recommend   reappointment from an appropriate academic unit
peer review committee (e.g. a unit advisory/ executive committee or
Promotion and Tenure Committee) in order to obtain a peer faculty
evaluation about the performance of the individual (see Section VII).
Unit administrators recommend reappointment to the dean, who will make a
recommendation on both the reappointment and the length of that
reappointment to the Associate Provost for Academic Human Resources, who
will make the final decision.

If HP faculty duties change as a result of the reappointment evaluation
discussion, that information (new expectations and duties) will be
reflected in a letter to the individual with a copy to be maintained in
his/her personnel file. The Health Programs faculty member will normally
be informed of the decision to reappoint shortly after the evaluation
and review process has taken place. Formal written notification of a
decision to reappoint must be made by the applicable unit administrator
to the individual not later than 90 days preceding the end date of the
individual\'s appointment.

::: {xmlns=""}
### D. Decisions Not to Recommend Reappointment
:::

A decision not to recommend reappointment for a Health Programs faculty
member does not necessarily imply that a faculty member has failed to
meet the standards of the University with respect to academic competence
and/or professional performance. This decision may be based, wholly or
in part, upon the availability of salary funds and/or departmental or
college needs. Such a decision is initiated at the level of the basic
administrative unit and the applicable dean. Final decision will rest
with the dean of the college and approval of the Associate Provost for
Academic Human Resources.

A Health Programs faculty member who is not to be recommended for
reappointment by the unit administrator and dean must be so notified in
writing by the appropriate unit administrator no later than 90 days
preceding the end date of the individual\'s appointment. Copies of the
notification, which will be initiated by the applicable unit
administrator, are to be sent to the dean. Upon written request of the
faculty member, the administrator recommending the decision (i.e., the
dean) shall transmit in writing the reasons for not recommending
reappointment. A Health Programs faculty member not recommended for
reappointment by the unit administrator and dean and not receiving
proper notification is given an extension of one year. The Health
Programs faculty member shall consider this arrangement as official
notification of separation from the university at the end of this one
year extension.

::: {xmlns=""}
### E. Promotion
:::

#### 1. Process and Reporting Form {#process-and-reporting-form xmlns="" style="margin-left: 30px;"}

Recommendations for promotion in rank in the Health Programs Faculty
Appointment System are made in the department and/or unit according to
unit, college and university bylaws, policies, procedures, standards and
criteria. The faculty, operating in an advisory mode, provides advice to
the academic unit administrator in the matter of promotion, as stated in
the unit bylaws (see Section VII). Each department, school or unit is
required to have procedures and criteria that are clearly formulated and
relevant on which to evaluate the performance of faculty members for
promotion. Following the recommendations of such peer review bodies, the
chairperson or director makes a recommendation taking into consideration
peer evaluations, including their quality and other supporting data and
information. The chairperson or director is responsible as an individual
for the recommendations he or she makes. Deans review independently each
recommendation and approve or disapprove, taking into account unit,
college and University criteria and other factors such as quality,
progress, resources, program needs, proportion of tenured, tenure system
and Health Programs faculty in each unit, and other relevant University
policies. Deans forward recommendations to the Associate Provost for
Academic Human Resources, who makes the final decision.

Promotions are normally effective on the date of reappointment.

A standard University form is used to document the evaluation of each
faculty member to be recommended for promotion.   Areas of evaluation
include patient care services (delivery and consultation), instruction
(pre-clinical, clinical, resident, post-doctoral, advising), scholarly
productivity and research, institutional services (committee service,
administrative service), and other areas as specified.

Health Programs faculty must be notified of the opportunity and the
process for promotion review.

#### 2. Time in Rank for Promotion {#time-in-rank-for-promotion xmlns="" style="margin-left: 30px;"}

A recommendation for promotion from assistant professor (HP) to
associate professor (HP) should be based on several years of sustained
and outstanding achievements in clinical patient care services,
teaching, scholarship and/or public service as an assistant professor,
consistent with performance levels for similar faculty expected at a
premier, land‐grant AAU University. The HP faculty member should not
consider promotion to be an automatic action.

A recommendation for promotion from associate professor (HP) to
professor (HP) should be based on several years of outstanding
achievement in clinical patient care service, teaching, research and/or
public service as an Associate Professor consistent with performance
levels for similar faculty expected at a premier, land‐grant AAU
University.

Bearing in mind the University\'s continuing objective to improve its
faculty, the unit and the college must refrain from doubtful
recommendations of promotion. The dean is to evaluate carefully each
recommendation to insure that it is well grounded and fully justified,
prior to forwarding such recommendation to the Associate Provost for
Academic Human Resources.\
\
[Back to Health Programs Faculty Appointment System
Handbook](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/health-programs-faculty-handbook/index.html)
 
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/health-programs-faculty-handbook/app_eval_reapp_promotion.pcf)
