---
title: 'X. Dismissal and Discipline of HP Faculty Members'
---

::: {#body}
Health Programs

**X. Dismissal and Discipline of HP Faculty Members**

An HP faculty member may be dismissed for cause for reasons such as, but
not limited to, lack of a valid license, or other clinical
credentialing, (e.g., failure to be able to obtain clinical privileges,
loss of license or privileges because of an action by the University, a
health care entity or governmental licensing agency), incompetence and
other reasons for dismissal as defined in the \"MSU Discipline and
Dismissal of Tenured Faculty For Cause Procedures\" (see Faculty
Handbook).   Conduct that is professionally unethical or action that
endangers patient safety is cause for immediate suspension and dismissal
following notice of dismissal. Practice privileges may be suspended by
the deans of the medical and nursing colleges at any time.

Prior to initiating dismissal action, the Unit administrators (chairs)
shall consult with the dean/separately reporting director who shall
consult with the Associate Provost for Academic Human Resources to
determine if initiation of dismissal action is appropriate.

An HP faculty member must be notified in writing that the University is
considering dismissal, and the basis upon which dismissal is being
considered. Upon notification, the HP faculty member must have the
opportunity to meet with the appropriate responsible administrators to
review the reasons that dismissal is being considered. The faculty
member shall have an opportunity to present oral and written evidence in
support of his/her position and in response to the reasons for dismissal
set forth by the responsible administrators. At this meeting the HP
faculty member may be accompanied by a representative of his/her
choosing, including legal counsel. The responsible administrators may
also be advised by legal counsel. After the above referenced meeting,
termination action may be taken if the responsible administrators
believe that dismissal is warranted.

If dismissal action is taken, the administrator must provide a written
termination notice to the HP faculty member including the reasons for
termination and inform the HP faculty member of the right to file a
grievance under the Faculty Grievance Policy. An HP faculty member will
be terminated no earlier than 30 days after the date of the termination
notice.

Where disciplinary action short of dismissal for cause is sought, the
unit administrator, after consultation with the dean or separately
reporting director and the Associate Provost for Academic Human
Resources, shall provide the faculty member with written notice of the
cause for disciplinary action and an opportunity to respond prior to the
imposition of any disciplinary action.

After receiving the response, the unit administrator shall make a
decision regarding the disciplinary action and notify the faculty member
in writing. The faculty member may challenge the imposition of any
disciplinary action by the unit administrator by filing a grievance
under provisions of the Faculty Grievance Policy. The processing of such
grievance shall be expedited. No disciplinary action, except temporary
reassignment of duties or temporary suspension with pay, shall be
implemented during the pendency of the grievance.

Disciplinary action may include but is not limited to reprimand,
suspension with or without pay, reassignment of duties, foregoing salary
increase and/or benefit improvements, and mandatory counseling and/or
monitoring of behavior and performance. Suspension without pay may not
exceed six months.\
\
[Back to Health Programs Faculty Appointment System
Handbook](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/health-programs-faculty-handbook/index.html)
 
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/health-programs-faculty-handbook/dismissal_discipline_hpfaculty.pcf)
