---
title: 'II\. Health Programs Faculty Appointments'
---

::: {#body}
Health Programs

**II. Health Programs Faculty Appointments**

The Health Programs Faculty Appointment System is available only to
individuals who hold a valid license to practice allopathic or
osteopathic medicine, veterinary medicine or nursing or other clinical
credential accepted by the State of Michigan appropriate for the
professional role and function.   HP faculty are appointed to one of
three ranks: Assistant Professor (HP), Associate Professor (HP), or
Professor (HP).

HP appointments are made in units and/or departments reporting through
the deans of the medical and nursing colleges to the Provost. Health
Programs faculty might also be appointed in the deans\' offices and in
other units or programs which originate out of the deans\' offices.

HP faculty may be appointed on an annual (AN) or academic (AY) year
basis; appointments may be full time or part time.

Initial HP appointments are made for a one to five year period upon
recommendation of the appropriate administrator (chair) as applicable to
the dean. The dean will make a final recommendation to the Associate
Provost for Academic Human Resources who will make the final decision.

Reappointments may be recommended for a one to five year period
following a formal review and evaluation. This review process will be
completed at least 90 days prior to the end date of an individual\'s
current HP appointment (see section VI. C).

If a faculty member is not to be reappointed, he/she must be notified in
writing at least 90 days in advance of the end date of the current
appointment (see section VI.D).

Although there is a strong, good faith commitment by the department to
fulfill the terms of the contract, a lack of funds is a legitimate
reason for termination during the contract, as well as a decision not to
renew a contract. If termination occurs during the term of the
appointment, the faculty member will be provided written notice 120 days
before the termination date.

HP faculty will not be dismissed due to capricious action by the
University, college or department prior to the end date of the
appointment. However, this assurance does not protect HP faculty who
engage in activities which are grounds for dismissal pursuant to those
listed in Section X.

Health Programs faculty are covered under the terms of the Faculty
Grievance Policy (FGP).\
\
[Back to Health Programs Faculty Appointment System
Handbook](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/health-programs-faculty-handbook/index.html)
 
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/health-programs-faculty-handbook/hpfaculty_appointments.pcf)
