---
title: |
    IX\. Faculty Status, Salary and Appointment Basis of Health Programs (HP)
    Faculty Members Who Assume Administrative Responsibilities
---

::: {#body}
Health Programs

**IX. Faculty Status, Salary and Appointment Basis of Health Programs
(HP) Faculty Members Who Assume Administrative Responsibilities**

::: {xmlns=""}
### A.  Faculty Status
:::

The faculty status of any HP faculty member who accepts an
administrative assignment must be specified as distinct from his/her
status as an administrator. The following aspects of HP faculty status
must be specified in writing at the time of appointment as an
administrator and provided to the faculty member:

-   Academic year (AY) or annual year (AN) appointment basis as a
    faculty member as distinct from appointment basis as an
    administrator.
-   Salary rate as a faculty member as distinct from salary rate as an
    administrator (including administrative increment or other pay
    supplement, when applicable).
-   Primary academic unit (department(s), school(s), and/or residential
    or non-departmentally organized college(s) as a faculty member,
    indicating where regular faculty responsibilities normally would be
    performed in the event of return to regular faculty status.
-   Duties to be performed as a faculty member while on assignment as an
    administrator.
-   Reappointment and promotion(s) criteria and procedures for faculty
    members while on assignment as an administrator.

The assignment period as an administrator may be shorter than or
concurrent with the HP appointment period. Termination as an
administrator does not modify the HP contract commitment as a faculty
member.

Assignment as an administrator is subject to change at any time at the
discretion of the relevant dean. If assignment as an administrator is
terminated, the HP faculty member will return to regular faculty duties
in his/her primary academic unit, e.g., department(s), school(s), and/or
residential or non-departmentally organized colleges(s). Any specific
arrangements concerning a return to faculty duties must be specified in
writing.

::: {xmlns=""}
### B. Salary and Appointment Basis
:::

An individual's salary rate as a faculty member is not changed by reason
of an administrative assignment.   Any salary change related to the
administrative assignment is for the period of service in the
administrative assignment. The salary rate as a faculty member should be
reviewed and specified explicitly each year the faculty member holds an
administrative assignment.

An administrative assignment that requires a change from an academic
year (AY) appointment to an annual (AN) appointment basis will result in
a salary that is 11/9 of the faculty member's base academic year (AY)
salary. If an administrative increment is appropriate, it should be
added after the determination of the AN salary. If reassignment from
administrative duties results in a shift from an annual (AN) appointment
basis to an academic year (AY) appointment basis, the AY salary will be
an amount equivalent to 9/11 of the current AN salary. If an
administrative increment exists, it is to be deducted before the AN
salary is changed to an AY basis. In every case, a shift from an
administrative assignment to faculty duties shall result in withdrawal
of any administrative increment.

The salary rate as a faculty member should be specified explicitly each
year. The following statement should be communicated by the appropriate
administrator to each faculty member with an administrative assignment
on the occasion of annual salary increases:

"Your salary rate effective October 1, \_\_\_\_\_ will be
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. This includes an administrative increment of
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. Your salary rate as a faculty member appointed on
an academic year basis, excluding this administrative increment, is
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, effective October 1, \_\_\_\_\_."

This language may be modified if an annual year (AN) appointment basis
is applicable in the faculty role and/or the addition of an
administrative increment is not required by reason of administrative
responsibilities.

::: {xmlns=""}
### C.   Performance of Faculty Duties
:::

Faculty duties may be performed by the faculty member while serving in
an administrative capacity. These duties may include teaching, research,
patient care, and public service in the relevant primary academic
unit(s), i.e., department(s), school(s), and/or residential or
non-departmentally organized college(s). In addition, committee
assignments, supervision of graduate students, participation in academic
governance as consistent with University, college, and unit bylaws, in
or on behalf of the academic unit may be involved. Subject to a written
agreement between the relevant college and unit level administrator(s),
performance in these activities is evaluated in accordance with normal
unit procedures and taken into consideration in determining the annual
salary increase.

::: {xmlns=""}
### D. Criteria and Procedures for Reappointment and Promotion
:::

Performance in assigned faculty duties is the primary component in the
evaluation for reappointment, and promotion of the HP faculty member
holding an administrative assignment. A written statement indicating how
the unit's regular standards and criteria for reappointment and
promotion will be applied to the individual during the period of
administrative assignment must be prepared by the applicable unit
administrator, after consultation with the designated unit advisory
committee, and be sent to the affected faculty member before the
administrative assignment is approved. The annual review of performance
must include assessment of progress as a faculty member performing
regular faculty duties, i.e., instruction, research, patient care and
public service.

Evaluation of an HP faculty member assigned to both faculty and
administrative duties and responsibilities must take into account the
relative assignment of effort to these duties and responsibilities. The
evaluation of faculty and other primary academic unit duties is
conducted in accordance with normal academic unit procedures and
criteria.

Normally, the primary academic unit will initiate the recommendation for
reappointment and/or promotion (as appropriate) in accordance with
Health Programs procedures. However, the appropriate administrator may
also initiate the recommendation. In such cases, the recommendation must
be reviewed and endorsed by the primary academic unit(s) in which the
individual holds academic rank. Such an endorsement indicates the
willingness of the unit to endorse the individual as a faculty member in
the unit at the recommended rank.\
\
[Back to Health Programs Faculty Appointment System
Handbook](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/health-programs-faculty-handbook/index.html)
 
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/health-programs-faculty-handbook/hpfaculty_admin_responsibilities.pcf)
