---
title: 'III\. Roles of Health Programs Faculty'
---

::: {#body}
Health Programs

**III. Roles of Health Programs Faculty**

Health Programs faculty are expected to devote a significant portion of
their time to clinical activities such as patient care, clinical and
pre‐clinical teaching, scholarship and institutional service. The
following sections describe the areas of HP faculty assignments.

### A. Patient Care Service {#a.-patient-care-service xmlns=""}

The Health Programs faculty member provides patient care services within
owned and/or affiliated University and community facilities and pursuant
to University billing procedures. The patient care services provided
fall within the scope of practice of the specialty designations
recognized by the medical, nursing or professional discipline of the
faculty member.

::: {xmlns=""}
### B. Clinical and Preclinical Teaching
:::

The Health Programs faculty member is obligated to provide, coordinate,
or assist in giving instruction to students, including undergraduate and
graduate nursing students, medical students, residents, post‐doctoral
fellows, and practicing professionals in the facilities in which the
patient care mission of the medical and nursing colleges is carried out.
Teaching responsibilities may be supported on general fund dollars. Such
instruction typically includes required or elective clerkships for
medical students, clinical supervision for nursing students, supervision
and direct instruction for residents and post‐doctoral fellows. Health
Programs faculty may also be assigned pre clinical instructional duties
(i.e. in college interdepartmental programs, physical examination and
interviewing courses, systems courses, etc.). Health Programs faculty
may also participate in training programs and continuing medical/nursing
education efforts supported and sponsored by the colleges. Evaluation of
student progress as an integral piece of the educational process is also
included as an HP faculty responsibility.

Health Programs faculty are required to comply with the provisions of
the Michigan State University Code of Teaching Responsibility, e.g.,
statement of course objectives, examination policy, office hours, course
evaluation, etc.

::: {xmlns=""}
### C. Scholarly Productivity and Research
:::

Health Programs faculty are expected to be scholarly in the conduct of
their responsibilities, whether in teaching, institutional service, or
in patient care services.   While acknowledging that the time available
to conduct scholarly work will be limited, the conduct of scholarly work
that expands the boundaries of knowledge is expected of HP faculty
members. The exact type of inquiry should be related to the interests
and specialization that the individual holds, thus the research or
scholarly work conducted would reflect those abilities and interests
(i.e., basic, clinical, quantitative, qualitative). The proportion of
the individual\'s job responsibilities that is to be devoted to
scholarly work must be negotiated at the time of hiring and subsequently
at each evaluation meeting with regard to reappointment.

Evaluation of scholarly productivity and research (for the purposes of
reappointment and/or promotion) shall be based on the proportion of an
individual\'s time that is devoted to research and the usual indices of
research productivity and quality, i.e., publications, professional
presentations, participation in professional organizations, research
proposal submissions, etc., and the standards and review guidelines of
each department and college.

Health Programs faculty are expected to conduct scholarly and research
related activities in accordance with the ethical procedures that govern
the conduct of science. These include exercising critical
self‐discipline and judgment in generating, using, extending, and
transmitting knowledge, adhering to the highest standards of
intellectual honesty, overseeing and evaluating the research and
creative efforts of students and subordinates. Health Programs faculty
shall conduct all research and creative activity in a manner consistent
with accepted scholarly standards and in conformity with legal,
professional, and University codes, policies and regulations which
govern research and scholarly endeavors. Applicable University policies
are found in the section entitled Research and Creative Endeavors in the
Faculty Handbook.

::: {xmlns=""}
### D. Institutional Services
:::

Health Programs Faculty are obligated to participate in the provision of
institutional services at the department and college levels, including
committee service, administrative service (when appropriate) and student
advising.

Health Programs Faculty participate in the establishment and functioning
of a governance system at the department and college levels in
accordance with the applicable unit and college bylaws. HP faculty can
also participate in University-level academic governance activities
pursuant to the Bylaws for Academic Governance.

Health Programs faculty may contribute to the academic management of
departments, units and/or the colleges by developing and recommending
policy related to faculty affairs, student affairs, academic records,
and academic fiscal management. Institutional service also includes
academic activity such as student advising and curriculum development.

::: {xmlns=""}
### E. Other Faculty Roles
:::

While patient care services (medical, nursing, surgical, psychiatric,
psychological, etc.) are basic to the role of an HP faculty member, such
services are not exclusive of other service functions that parallel
those of other University faculty members, i.e. facilitating and
conducting public service education and outreach, committee and
administrative duties. Health Programs faculty, in accordance with
University policy and regulations, can serve as valuable resources and
provide services by working with government, industry, public and
private organizations. Full time Health Programs faculty have the right
to engage in a limited amount of non clinically related outside work for
pay in accordance with University policy and regulations (Outside Work
for Pay, Michigan State University Medical Service Plan ‐ Colleges of
Human and Osteopathic Medicine, Michigan State University College of
Nursing Practice Plan, College of Veterinary Medicine Practice Plan).  

A more detailed description of the responsibilities expected of
University faculty is included in the statement on Faculty Rights and
Responsibilities in the Faculty Handbook (excluding the section on
tenure).\
\
[Back to Health Programs Faculty Appointment System
Handbook](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/health-programs-faculty-handbook/index.html)
 
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/health-programs-faculty-handbook/roles_hpfaculty.pcf)
