---
title: Compensation
---

::: {#body}
Support Staff

**Compensation**

**Payroll Information**

During orientation in Human Resources, new employees are required to
complete an employee's withholding allowance certificate (W-4).
Employees must present their social security card to Human Resources
when completing the required forms. Additional forms completed may
include: the employee's withholding certificate for city income tax
(CW-4 MSU), paycheck direct deposit authorization, and union or
association dues card.

Employees may view and make changes to their payroll information related
to direct deposit of pay and tax withholdings (federal W-4 and state of
Michigan W-4) through the [Enterprise Business System
portal](https://ebs.msu.edu "EBS Portal").

Salaried employees are paid monthly on the last workday of the month.
Clerical-technical, labor, and other hourly employees are paid bi-weekly
on Friday.

For additional information concerning payroll forms, policies, and
procedures, visit the [Payroll Office
website](http://www.ctlr.msu.edu/COPayroll/ "Payroll Office"), call MSU
HR at 517-353-4434 or refer to MSU's [Manual of Business
Procedures](http://www.ctlr.msu.edu/COMBP/mbp55.aspx "Manual of Business Procedures") or
the [applicable Collective Bargaining
Agreement](https://hr.msu.edu/contracts/index.html "Union Contracts").

**Overtime**

All University employees, except those exempted as executive,
administrative, or professional, are covered by overtime provisions of
the Federal Fair Labor Standards Act and by the Michigan Wage and Hour
Act where it exceeds the Federal Fair Labor Standards Act. Overtime,
when assigned, is a requirement of every position in the University. The
employer will endeavor to give employees advance notice of overtime
assignment when practicable. The administrative head or designated
representative must authorize all overtime work prior to the performance
of work. Employees may not authorize or certify their own overtime.

Exempt Employees: Employees who are exempt under the definitions of the
Federal Fair Labor Standards Act will not normally receive overtime pay
(except administrative professionals and supervisory levels 8 through
11).

Nonexempt Employees: Nonexempt employees working in excess of 40 hours
in a week shall be given the choice of: compensatory time off at time
and one-half or overtime pay at the rate of not less than one and
one-half times the regular rate of pay.

This standard varies by collective bargaining unit. For more
information, check the [applicable Collective Bargaining
Agreement](https://hr.msu.edu/contracts/index.html "Union Contracts") or
look online for [additional information on
overtime](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/support-staff/support-staff-policies-procedures/overtime.html "Overtime").

**Longevity**

To recognize long-term service, Michigan State University has a
Longevity Pay Plan that applies to some collective bargaining units and
non-represented employees. Payment for longevity purposes is made
annually on the first workday of December and is based on the base rate
of pay as of September 1 prior to payment, but not to exceed the
schedule below. The longevity year is a 12-month period that begins
October 1 and ends September 30.

**Initial Eligibility:** To qualify for the first longevity payment, an
employee must have completed six years of continuous half-time or
greater service as of October 1 of the longevity year. Periods of
inactive service totaling 93 calendar days or more will adjust the
longevity date accordingly, and no payment is issued in that longevity
year. Military leave, however, will not adjust the longevity date.

**Continuing Eligibility**: After establishing initial eligibility,
employees must be actively employed for 39 weeks (273 calendar days)
during the longevity year to receive a longevity payment on December 1.

**Longevity Payment Schedule**: For each longevity year, the following
payment schedule is used:

  --------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Years of Continuous Service**   ** Annual Longevity Pay Percent of First \$9,500 of Annual Wage\***
   6 through 9 years                 2
   10 through 13 years               3
   14 through 17 years               4
   18 through 21 years               5
   22 through 25 years               6
   26 or more years                  8
  --------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------

\* Three-quarter-time employee: percent of first \$7,125 of annual wage

\* Half-time employee: percent of first \$4,750 of annual wage

**Other**: Eligible employees terminated or retiring during the
longevity year will receive a prorated longevity payment. Contact Human
Resources at 517-353-4434 to determine if an employee group is included
in this program. View  [longevity payment
information](/policies-procedures/support-staff/support-staff-handbook/ss-handbook/employee-rights/longevity.html "Longevity Payments").

**Call-In Pay**

A nonexempt regular employee returning to work due to receiving a call
to return to work after leaving University premises shall receive no
fewer than three hours pay or the equivalent in compensatory time.
Individuals in an "on-call" or "temporary" status are not eligible for
call-in pay. For more information, refer to specific [Collective
Bargaining
Agreements](https://hr.msu.edu/contracts/index.html "Union Contracts").\
\
[Back to Employee
Handbook](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/support-staff/support-staff-handbook/ss-handbook/index.html "Employee Handbook")
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/support-staff/support-staff-handbook/ss-handbook/employee-rights/compensation.pcf)
