---
title: Support Staff Employee Handbook Overview
---

::: {#body}
Support Staff

**Support Staff Employee Handbook Overview**

Michigan State University Spartans work every day to advance the common
good in uncommon ways.

Together, we tackle some of the world's toughest problems to find
solutions that make life better---from alternative energy to better food
safety to breakthrough medical and environmental applications achieved
through rare isotope research. We\'re good at it, and we\'ve been at it
for more than 150 years.

The nation's pioneer land-grant university, MSU began as a bold
experiment that democratized higher education and helped bring science
and innovation into everyday life. The revolutionary concept became a
model for the nation.

Today, MSU is one of the top research universities in the world---on one
of the biggest, greenest campuses in the nation. Home to nationally
ranked and recognized academic, residential college, and
service-learning programs, we\'re a diverse community of dedicated
students, scholars and staff, athletes and artists, scientists and
leaders.

As an MSU staff member, you play a vital role in supporting the
continuing success of Michigan State University. In ways both practical
and profound, every Spartan is part of a larger, unstoppable team that
creates a stronger, more sustainable and more hopeful future for all.

There are approximately 6,200 Support Staff employees on campus and
around the state. Our employees perform work that is essential to the
operation of the University and includes a wide range of functions.
Support staff employees include groundskeepers who maintain the pristine
campus, boiler operators who work at the power plant, employees who cook
and serve foods in the various dining halls, technical employees who
maintain the University's electronic resources and much, much more.

Employees who are represented should also reference the appropriate
collective bargaining agreement listed below.

**Collective Bargaining Agreements**

These are the certified support staff collective bargaining units at
MSU:

Clerical Technical Union of MSU (CTU)

Local 274, International Alliance of Theatrical Stage Employees and
Motion Picture Machine Operators

Local 324, International Union of Operating Engineers

Local 999, Council 25, AFSCME, AFL-CIO

Local 1585, Council 25, AFSCME, AFL-CIO

Lodge 141, Fraternal Order of Police (FOP), MSU Non-Supervisory Division

MSU Administrative Professional Association (APA)

MSU Administrative Professional Supervisors Association (APSA)

In some cases, collective bargaining agreements may alter or modify
personnel policies and benefits described herein. In these cases, the
applicable provisions of the collective bargaining agreements will
prevail. Details of [collective bargaining
agreements](https://hr.msu.edu/contracts/index.html "Contracts") are
available online.

[Additional University
information](http://msu.edu/about/index.html "About MSU"), including
current MSU facts, rankings, Board of Trustees and central
administration are available on the MSU website.
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/support-staff/support-staff-handbook/ss-handbook/Overview.pcf)
