---
title: Contracts with the University
---

::: {#body}
Support Staff

**Contracts with the University**

Michigan law requires that the Board of Trustees approve the terms of
any contract between the University and one of the following: (1) a
University employee, (2) a business or other entity of which a
University employee is a partner, member or employee, (3) a private
corporation in which a University employee has a specified ownership
interest or is a director, officer, or employee, or (4) a trust of which
a University employee is a beneficiary or trustee. (See [Contracts of
Public Servants with Public Entities; MCLA
15.321](http://www.legislature.mi.gov/%28S%285gt4ulb1jy1mzgahu2pfsiel%29%29/mileg.aspx?page=GetObject&objectname=mcl-15-321 "Public Servants") et.
seq.) Contracts or other agreements falling within the scope of this
state law should be provided to the Office of the General Counsel for
review and approval by the Board of Trustees.

University employees must take all appropriate steps to assure that the
University does not knowingly enter into purchase commitments which
would violate Michigan law or result in a conflict of interest. For the
purpose of this section, a conflict of interest exists when an
employee\'s financial interests or other opportunities for personal
benefit may compromise, or reasonably appear to compromise, the
independence of judgment with which the employee performs his/her
responsibilities at the University. Employees should refer questionable
purchase transactions to the director of University Services or the
purchasing manager.
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/support-staff/support-staff-handbook/ss-handbook/ordinances-policies/contracts.pcf)
