---
title: 'Appendix VI: Procedures for the Dismissal of CA Staff for Cause'
---

::: {#body}
Continuing Appointment System of FRIB-NSCL

**Appendix VI: Procedures for the Dismissal of CA Staff for Cause**

::: {xmlns=""}
**1.0 **A CA staff member (whether on probationary appointment or with
continuing status) may be dismissed for cause, including but not limited
to:
:::

::: {xmlns=""}
-   intellectual dishonesty;
-   acts of discrimination, including harassment, prohibited by law or
    University policy;
-   acts of moral turpitude;
-   theft or misuse of University property;
-   incompetence;
-   refusal to perform reasonable assigned duties;
-   use of professional authority to exploit others;
-   violation of University policy substantially related to performance
    of staff member responsibilities;
-   conviction of violation(s) of law(s) which are substantially related
    to the fitness of staff members to engage in teaching, research;
    service/outreach and/or administration,
-   other such actions which impair the intellectual integrity for which
    the Laboratory and University strive;
-   recurring failure to meet staff responsibilities
:::

In situations where dismissal is not sought, the Policy and Procedure
for Implementing Disciplinary Action Where Dismissal is Not Sought from
the Faculty Handbook will be followed.

**2.0** In instances of dismissal for cause other than recurring failure
to meet staff responsibilities, the following procedures will apply.

**2.1** When the Director is considering dismissing a staff member for
cause, the Director shall arrange for a personal conference with the CA
staff member. At this point, the difficulty may be resolved by mutual
agreement or the CA staff member may resign. If the CA staff member does
not resign, the Director shall prepare a written statement of the basis
for dismissal, which will be provided to the CA staff member. Following
notice of intent to dismiss, the staff member shall have 7 calendar days
to request in writing a formal hearing with the Director to challenge
the dismissal.

**2.2** In the hearing, the CA staff member and the relevant Department
Head shall have the opportunity to call witnesses and present evidence
related to the dismissal action. The CA staff member may choose to be
advised by counsel in this hearing. Counsel must be a member of the
University community (faculty, staff, or student) unless there are
criminal charges pending against the staff member related to the
dismissal proceedings. Counsel may advise and consult with her/his
client but may not participate in the hearing itself. Failure of the CA
staff member to agree to participate in the formal hearing shall not
prevent the Director from recommending dismissal action.

**2.3** Within 14 calendar days of the conclusion of the hearing, the
Director shall inform the CA staff member and Office of the Provost in
writing of her/his decision concerning the dismissal action. If the
decision is to dismiss the CA staff member, the termination shall be
effective 30 calendar days from the date of the decision.

**2.4** Within 10 calendar days of receiving the Director\'s decision,
the CA staff member may submit a written appeal to the Director. The
appeal must allege that there has been a prejudicial violation of these
procedures or that the decision of the Director is not consistent with a
preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing. The dismissal
action shall be held in abeyance pending the appeal; however, the staff
member will be placed on a leave of absence without pay for the duration
of the appeal. Within 14 calendar days, the Director must forward the
written appeal (and any supporting documentation) to the Provost or
designee, along with a copy of the Director\'s hearing decision, any
written statements or evidence provided by the parties at the hearing,
and the Director\'s response to the appeal. The Provost or designee
shall issue a final decision on the appeal within 20 calendar days.

**3.0** In instances of dismissal for recurring failure to meet staff
responsibilities, the following procedure will apply.

**3.1**. Probationary Appointments: If, in the Director\'s judgment,
performance problems of a probationary CA staff member are serious
enough to consider dismissal for recurring failure to meet staff
responsibilities, she/he will meet with the CA staff member to discuss
the concerns. The difficulty may be resolved by mutual consent at this
time. If not, the Director will inform the staff member in writing that
she/he has convened a Reappointment-Promotion Committee and asked them
to review the stated charges. The procedures specified in Section 8
Procedures for Recommending Reappointment, Promotion, and Continuing
Status of this document will be utilized by the Committee in reviewing
the case. The Committee will have 30 calendar days to make a
recommendation to the Director regarding dismissal.

**3.2. **Within 10 calendar days of receiving the committee\'s
recommendation, the Director will issue his/her decision regarding the
dismissal. If the decision is made to dismiss the CA Staff Member, the
Director shall obtain the concurrence of the Provost or designee and
provide written notice of dismissal to the staff member. Dismissal is
effective 30 days from the date of the decision.

**3.3. **Continuing Appointments: If, in the Director\'s judgment,
performance problems of a CA staff member with Continuing Status are
serious enough to consider dismissal for recurring failure to meet staff
responsibilities, the following procedure will be followed. The Director
shall meet with the CA staff member to discuss the concerns. The
difficulty may be resolved by mutual consent at this time. If not, the
Director will inform the staff member in writing that she/he has formed
a special committee to review the stated charges. The Committee will
consist of two individuals from each of the professional categories and
two Tenure System faculty or FRIB/NSCL faculty. The Committee will
utilize the procedures specified in Section 8 Procedures for
Recommending Reappointment, Promotion, and Continuing Status of this
document. The Committee will have 30 calendar days to make a
recommendation to the Director regarding dismissal. Within 10 calendar
days of receiving the Committee\'s recommendation, the Director will
issue his/her decision regarding the dismissal. If the decision is made
to dismiss the CA staff member, the Director shall obtain the
concurrence of the Provost or designee and provide written notice of the
dismissal to the staff member. The dismissal will be effective 30
calendar days from the date of the dismissal notice. Alternatively, the
Director may provide the staff member with written notice that he/she
has failed to meet staff responsibilities on a recurring basis and that
he/she will be dismissed if performance is not improved to acceptable
levels within a reasonable period of time (generally 3 months). At the
conclusion of this period, the Committee will review the staff member\'s
performance again and provide a recommendation to the Director. After
receiving this recommendation, the Director may determine that the
individual has continued to fail to meet staff responsibilities. After
seeking the concurrence of the Provost or designee, the Director may
provide the staff member with written notice of dismissal. The dismissal
will be effective 30 calendar days from the date of the decision.

**3.4.** Within 10 calendar days of receiving notice of dismissal, the
CA staff member may submit a written appeal to the Director. The appeal
must allege that there has been a prejudicial violation of these
procedures or that the decision of the Director is not consistent with a
preponderance of the evidence presented to the Committee. The dismissal
action shall be held in abeyance pending the appeal; however, the staff
member will be placed on a leave of absence without pay for the duration
of the appeal. Within 14 calendar days, the Director must forward the
written appeal (and any supporting documentation) to the Provost or
designee, along with a copy of the Director\'s notice of dismissal, any
written statements or evidence provided by the parties to the Committee,
and the Director\'s response to the appeal. The Provost or designee
shall issue a final decision on the appeal within 20 calendar days.\
\
[Back to Staff Handbook for the Continuing Appointment System of
FRIB/NSCL](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/continuing-frib-nscl/index.html "FRIB/NSCL staff Handbook")
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/continuing-frib-nscl/appendixVI_dismissal.pcf)
