---
title: '11\. Position of CA Staff in the Event of a Cutback in Laboratory Funding'
---

::: {#body}
Continuing Appointment System of FRIB-NSCL

**11. Position of CA Staff in the Event of a Cutback in Laboratory
Funding**

::: {xmlns=""}
**11.1. **Continuation of CA System appointments is, in all
circumstance, contingent on availability of funds. Where the Laboratory
does not have sufficient funding, the following procedure will apply
with respect to termination from employment. Decisions regarding staff
reductions are to be based on the overall program goals consistent with
grant funding.
:::

**11.1.1. **The Director, after consultation with the faculty,
Department Heads and CA staff, will prepare a list of proposed staff
reductions based on the criterion of balancing the budget and
maintaining the essential functions of the Laboratory in the most
effective possible manner. This list will be circulated to all CA staff.

**11.1.2**. A seven person Review Committee will be appointed by the
Provost or designee, consisting of three persons from a group of six
nominated by the potentially affected staff members, three persons from
a group of six nominated by the Director, and one person from a group of
two nominated by the Program Officer of the Laboratory\'s major funding
agency. The committee will not include the Director or any potentially
affected staff member. If a person selected by the Provost or designee
declines to serve, the appropriate nominating group shall have the
opportunity to make replacement nominations, subject to the limitation
that if a committee willing to serve is not fully constituted within a
period of 30 calendar days from the time of the initial request for
nominations, the Provost or designee may proceed to finalize the
committee by naming individuals of her/his own choice.

**11.1.3. **The Review Committee will be charged to hear from the
Director as to the reasoning supporting her/his recommendations, to hear
petitions from potentially affected staff members wishing to make
presentations, to receive opinions from such other advisors as it wishes
to consult, and to make written recommendations to the Provost or
designee within 30 calendar days from the date the committee membership
was finalized.

**11.1.4. **Within 20 calendar days of receiving the report from the
committee, the Provost or designee will inform the Director of her/his
decision regarding the proposed plan. The staff reductions, if any, will
take effect in no less than three months from the date that the Director
was informed by the Provost\'s office.

**11.1.5.** Staff reductions made under this section will not be subject
to the FRIB/NSCL Grievance process.

**11.1.6.** Any person separated from the Laboratory pursuant to this
section shall be given a priority preference in the filling of any staff
vacancy in the Laboratory for which the individual is qualified. This
priority will remain in effect for three years starting from the date of
separation. During this period, eligible individuals will be notified in
writing regarding such vacancies and must return an indication of
interest to the Laboratory within ten calendar days in order to exercise
their priority preference.\
\
[Back to Staff Handbook for the Continuing Appointment System of
FRIB/NSCL](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/continuing-frib-nscl/index.html "FRIB/NSCL staff Handbook")
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/continuing-frib-nscl/cutback_lab_funds.pcf)
