---
title: '13\. General Conditions'
---

::: {#body}
Continuing Appointment System of FRIB-NSCL

**13. General Conditions**

::: {xmlns=""}
**13.1. **CA staff are covered by all policies, rules, regulations and
ordinances of Michigan State University. However, in the interest of
avoiding ambiguity, it is stated that the rules of the tenure system,
the Faculty Grievance Policy (except in the case of a grievance against
the Laboratory Director), and the Procedure for the Dismissal of Tenured
Faculty for Cause do not apply to the CA staff because separate rules
and procedures covering these topics are provided in this Handbook.
:::

From time-to-time, University policies and procedures change. In such
cases, the CA Handbook will automatically be updated to reflect these
changes when applicable. Changes to the CA Handbook may be proposed by
any member of the CA staff or by the Laboratory administration. CA Staff
must submit recommendations to the Director in writing and the
recommendation must be signed by at least three CA Staff Members. After
a 14 calendar day comment period, the Director will determine whether to
implement the changes and announce it to the CA staff, or form a
committee to review the recommendation. If a committee is to be formed,
the Director will appoint a committee consisting of two CA members from
each of the professional areas and two tenure system faculty members to
review the proposal and make a recommendation regarding the proposed
changes. The Director will review the committee\'s recommendations and
make such changes to the proposed revisions as she/he determines
necessary. Copies of the proposed revisions will then be sent to all CA
staff for review and comment. After a 14 calendar day comment period,
the Director will confirm or modify the proposed modifications and will
forward the proposal to the Provost or designee with copies to each CA
staff member. The Provost or designee will hold the proposed
modifications for a period of 14 calendar days. If, during this period,
written request is made to the Provost or designee by at least three CA
staff, the Provost or designee will schedule a comments session with the
Laboratory Director and all CA staff, to receive advice and comments on
the proposed changes. Noting the comments received, the Provost or
designee will confirm or modify the proposed changes and, with
notification to all CA staff, modifications approved by the Provost or
designee will be put into effect.\
\
[Back to Staff Handbook for the Continuing Appointment System of
FRIB/NSCL](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/continuing-frib-nscl/index.html "FRIB/NSCL staff Handbook")
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/continuing-frib-nscl/general_conditions.pcf)
