---
title: '09\. Grievance Procedure'
---

::: {#body}
Continuing Appointment System of FRIB-NSCL

**09. Grievance Procedure**

::: {xmlns=""}
**9.1.** Any CA staff member may initiate a grievance alleging a
violation of existing policies or established practices by laboratory
management other than the Director. Grievances against the Laboratory
Director shall follow the University\'s Faculty Grievance Policy. Before
filing a grievance, the CA staff member must discuss his/her complaint
with appropriate Laboratory administrators in an attempt to resolve the
complaint informally.
:::

**9.2.** If the CA staff member\'s complaint is not satisfactorily
resolved after informal discussion with the appropriate administrator,
the CA staff member may initiate the grievance procedure by submitting a
written statement of the grievance to their Department Head within 30
calendar days of first knowledge of the alleged violation. If the
Department Head is the administrator whose actions are at issue, the
Director will decide who hears the grievance. The grievance statement
shall set forth the alleged violation of existing policy or established
practices, a concise statement of the facts relevant to the grievance,
the name of the administrator whose action is at issue, the approximate
date on which the alleged action took place, and the redress sought.
Within 30 calendar days of filing the grievance statement, both parties
to the grievance shall have an opportunity to meet with the Department
Head or designate and present relevant information and/or witnesses on
their behalf. The Department Head or designate may seek additional
information from anyone who has information relevant to the grievance.
The Department Head or designate will provide the parties with a written
decision indicating his/her findings within 30 calendar days from
hearing the grievance.

**9.3.** Either party may appeal the decision of the Department Head to
the Director of the Laboratory within 20 calendar days of receiving the
Department Head\'s written decision. Within 14 calendar days of
receiving the appeal, the Director shall be provided with a statement of
the grievance, any testimony or evidence provided by the parties in the
initial Hearing, and a copy of the Department Head\'s response to the
grievance. In considering the appeal, the Director may receive
additional testimony or evidence, either oral or written, from the
parties to the grievance or from other staff and faculty who may provide
information. The Director will issue a written decision and
recommendations within 20 calendar days of hearing the appeal. Either
party may appeal the decision of the Director to the Provost or designee
within 20 calendar days of the written decision. The appeal must allege
that there has been a prejudicial violation of the grievance procedures
or that the decision of the Director of the Laboratory is not consistent
with the preponderance of the evidence presented during the appeal. The
Provost or designee shall be provided with a statement of the appeal,
any written statements or evidence provided by the parties, and a copy
of the decisions of the Department Head and Director. The Provost or
designee shall issue a final decision on the appeal within 20 calendar
days.\
\
[Back to Staff Handbook for the Continuing Appointment System of
FRIB/NSCL](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/continuing-frib-nscl/index.html "FRIB/NSCL staff Handbook")
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/continuing-frib-nscl/grievance_procedure.pcf)
