---
title: |
    08\. Procedures for Recommending Reappointment, Promotion, and Continuing
    Status
---

::: {#body}
Continuing Appointment System of FRIB-NSCL

**08. Procedures for Recommending Reappointment, Promotion, and
Continuing Status**

::: {xmlns=""}
**8.1.** Reappointment, promotion, and Continuing Status reviews of CA
staff are intended to advance the overall quality of the Laboratory\'s
CA staff and of its research and construction programs. Criteria and
standards will be comparable to the highest standards used in equivalent
employment categories at other research laboratories.
:::

**8.2.** Reappointment, promotion, and Continuing Status reviews will be
initiated in one of three ways: a) The Associate Provost and Associate
Vice President for Academic Human Resources will send to the Director of
the Laboratory a list of CA staff members for whom reappointment and
continuing appointment actions are mandatory; b) The Reappointment
Promotion Committees (RPC\'s) may identify CA staff members for optional
promotions; c) The CA staff member may request a vote to form a review
subcommittee by their RPC.

**8.3. **Reappointment-Promotion Committees (RPC) for CA staff members
in each professional category shall consist of all higher rank CA staff
in the professional specialty of the particular candidate, plus two
higher rank members from each of the professional specialties different
from that of the candidate. If the candidate\'s line manager is not a
regular member of the RPC, the line manager shall be made an ex-officio
member of the RPC. An RPC for Research staff may have membership from
tenure system and FRIB/NSCL faculty holding full or joint appointments
in the Laboratory. The four members of each RPC representing
professional specialties different from that of the candidate will be
designated by the Director. If the designated professional category does
not have more than one member at the required rank, a corresponding
vacancy or vacancies shall exist in the RPC.

**8.4**. After reviewing the Evaluation Folders and holding appropriate
discussions, the RPC will decide by vote which optional actions will be
considered by subcommittees. Unless the committee decides otherwise, a
vote of 40% of the full committee is required to form a subcommittee. If
a committee member cannot be present at an RPC meeting where a vote will
be taken, he/she may request an absentee ballot from the committee
Chair. If an absentee ballot is not submitted to the Chair prior to the
meeting, it will be considered an abstention.

**8.5**. Each FRIB/NSCL Department Head, in consultation with the chair
of the RPC, shall appoint a three person subcommittee of the RPC to
consider reappointment, promotion, and continuing appointment status
recommendations for CA staff members in her/his department.

**8.5.1**. The subcommittee shall base its judgment on its assessment of
the staff member\'s performance and her/his overall contribution to the
research and construction programs of the Laboratory.

**8.5.2**. The subcommittee will review the contents of the CA staff
member\'s evaluation folder. Comments and information should be
solicited from other members of the Laboratory, from appropriate outside
referees, and from any other relevant information source. The
subcommittee shall confer with the CA staff member\'s line manager and
offer to consult the CA staff member.

**8.5.3**. The subcommittee shall present its written recommendations
and the basis for the recommendation to the full RPC for the relevant
professional category and grade.

**8.6**. Over 50% of the full committee must vote to recommend a
reappointment or promotion action. If a committee member cannot be
present at an RPC meeting where a vote will be taken, he/she may request
an absentee ballot from the committee Chair. If an absentee ballot is
not submitted to the Chair prior to the meeting, it will be considered
an abstention. The recommendations of the RPC will be forwarded to the
Department Head. If the Department Head considers an action different
than the recommendation of the RPC, she/he shall meet with the RPC
before taking such action and present reasons and hear comments from the
RPC. The recommendation of the Department Head, along with the
recommendation of the RPC, shall then be forwarded through line
management successively to the Director and to the Provost or designee
for appropriate action.

**8.7**. Reappointment, promotion, or Continuing Status recommendations
shall be communicated to the Provost or designee for each recommendation
via submission of the FRIB/NSCL Reappointment, Promotion, and Continuing
Status form. The Provost or designee will review the recommendations of
the Director no later than November 1 prior to the ending date of the
probationary appointment. The CA staff member will be informed in
writing regarding his/her appointment status no later than the December
15th following the review.

**8.8**. The awarding of Continuing Status will be based on a record of
sustained, outstanding achievement in their field. A recommendation for
promotion from the rank of Engineer (FRIB/NSCL), Physicist (FRIB/NSCL)
or Assistant Professor (FRIB/NSCL) to Staff Engineer (FRIB/NSCL), Staff
Physicist (FRIB/NSCL) or Associate Professor (FRIB/NSCL), or from the
rank of Staff Engineer (FRIB/NSCL), Staff Physicist (FRIB/NSCL), or
Associate Professor (FRIB/NSCL), to Senior Engineer (FRIB/NSCL), Senior
Physicist (FRIB/NSCL) or Professor (FRIB/NSCL) should be based on
several years of sustained, outstanding achievements in their field.

**8.9.** All personnel actions under the CA system are reported to the
Board of Trustees of Michigan State University.\
\
[Back to Staff Handbook for the Continuing Appointment System of
FRIB/NSCL](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/continuing-frib-nscl/index.html "FRIB/NSCL staff Handbook")
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/continuing-frib-nscl/reappointment_promotion_cont-status.pcf)
