---
title: '01\. Role and Responsibilities of CA Staff'
---

::: {#body}
Continuing Appointment System of FRIB-NSCL

**01. Role and Responsibilities of CA Staff**

::: {xmlns=""}
**1.1 **The CA staff of the Laboratory includes three (3) ranks in each
of three (3) areas designated Engineering Staff, Physics Staff, and
Research Staff. The specific titles for the nine (9) categories are
respectively: l) Engineering staff\--Engineer (FRIB/NSCL), Staff
Engineer (FRIB/NSCL), and Senior Engineer (FRIB/NSCL); 2) Physics
staff\-- Physicist (FRIB/NSCL), Staff Physicist (FRIB/NSCL), and Senior
Physicist (FRIB/NSCL); and 3) Research Staff \--Assistant Professor
(FRIB/NSCL), Associate Professor (FRIB/NSCL), and Professor (FRIB/NSCL).
A general responsibility of staff members in all of the above categories
is to conduct her/his assignment in a manner which furthers the goals
and mission of the Laboratory program in a professionally responsible
and ethical manner. Their contributions are generally at a strategically
important level. Additionally, responsibilities of the respective groups
are:
:::

**1.1.1** The role of the CA Engineering staff typically is to
participate in and supervise the design, fabrication, assembly, testing
and operation of advanced instrumentation systems supporting the goals
of the Laboratory\'s research programs.

**1.1.2** The role of the CA Physics staff typically is to accomplish
conceptual development, efficient implementation, and effective
operation of advanced instrumentation systems of the Laboratory,
including research and development on advanced instrumentation systems
relevant to the future program of the Laboratory.

**1.1.3 **The role of the CA Research staff typically is to encompass a
combination of a) independent research activities and b) contributions
to the research capabilities and activities of the research group in
which they are appointed.

Future additions of professional groups to the Laboratory will carry
parallel titles to those professional groups listed above. Staff members
in a new professional specialty will be assigned to one of the previous
groups until the new category has at least five members, at which time
the category will become an additional group.

**1.2 **Fixed-term and CA system staff are eligible to participate in
laboratory business by serving on FRIB/NSCL committees. The laboratory
director welcomes input from all CA staff on FRIB/NSCL matters.

**1.3 **Any CA staff member may apply for and/or act as senior
investigator on sponsored research projects in accordance with
established University procedures and policies. In addition, CA Research
staff may act as advisors to graduate students in thesis research if
concurrence is obtained from the appropriate degree-granting unit of the
University.\
\
[Back to Staff Handbook for the Continuing Appointment System of
FRIB/NSCL](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/continuing-frib-nscl/index.html "FRIB/NSCL staff Handbook")
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/continuing-frib-nscl/roles_responsibilities.pcf)
