---
title: Administrative Review
---

::: {#body}
Faculty Handbook

**Administrative Review**

 Last updated: 10/19/2001

**IV. ACADEMIC HUMAN RESOURCES POLICIES *(Cont.)***

*This policy was issued by the Office of the Provost on April 24, 1991
and revised on October 19, 2001.*

Faculty and academic staff members covered by the Faculty Grievance
Policy (see FGP Section 1.1) have the opportunity to have personnel
concerns reviewed at their request by MSU\'s academic administrators. 
The administrative review procedure is an informal process providing
such an avenue for faculty/academic staff to request an independent
assessment from their department chairperson/school director, dean, and
Office of the Provost on such personnel matters as salary status,
reappointment, promotion and tenure.  This procedure is not intended to
supersede informal discussion between the faculty/academic staff member
and the department chairperson/school director in resolving these
issues.  The administrative review process may involve consideration and
possible redress of substantive issues (changes in salary, promotion and
tenure status, etc.) at department, school and dean levels.  The Office
of the Provost considers matters of process only, i.e., whether
appropriate or applicable procedures have been followed, etc.  (Possible
redress available is to direct an additional substantive review in the
department, school, or college.)

Utilization of the administrative review procedure does not preclude a
faculty/academic staff member from pursuing a grievance filed on a
timely basis regarding the same matter under the Faculty Grievance
Policy.  If a grievance is filed, it will be held in abeyance pending
completion of the administrative review.  However, the administrative
review process could not be invoked in cases where a complaint is filed
with a court.  Requests for an administrative review should be handled
in a timely manner.

The administrative review process is initiated by a letter of request
from the faculty/academic staff member to the dean of the applicable
college; an information copy is also sent to the Associate Provost and
Associate Vice President for Academic Human Resources.  This letter
should be accompanied by materials in support of request.  The dean
transmits these materials to the relevant department chairperson/school
director  for  review in accordance with usual unit standards, criteria
and procedures.   On  conclusion  of this review, which should be based
on usual peer review advisory procedures, a written response should be 
sent  by  the  department  chairperson/school  director  to  the 
faculty/academic  staff  member.   If  the faculty/academic  staff 
member  is  not  satisfied  with  this  response,  an  appeal  can  be 
made to the dean for an additional review of the record, which should
include an assessment of the original record, the unit\'s response and
rationale, and any commentary the faculty/academic staff member wishes
to provide with respect to the unit\'s response.

On matters of substance, the dean\'s determination is final.  However,
if the faculty/academic staff member is not satisfied with the dean\'s
response and the concerns address procedural matters, a request for
additional review can be made to the Office of the Provost (Associate
Provost and Associate Vice President for Academic Human Resources).  In
such cases, the Office of the Provost will review all materials and
documents initially provided as well as responses from the unit and the
college and any commentary from the faculty/academic staff member
regarding the review in the unit and college.  The Office of the Provost
then makes a final determination on procedural matters based on its
review of the procedural record.  As noted above, final responses by
either the Office of the Dean or the Office of the Provost do not
preclude pursuing a grievance under the Faculty Grievance Policy.

Time Limits:  Responses by the relevant administrator to the original
request or for an appeal should be provided within thirty (30) calendar
days, excluding the period May 16 through August 15 if the requirement
for usual peer review advisory procedures cannot be met.  The
administrator may extend the response deadline up to an additional
thirty (30) calendar days at her/his discretion.  The administrator will
notify the faculty/academic staff member whenever this right to extend
the response deadline is invoked, with a copy to the dean and/or the
Associate Provost/Associate Vice President for Academic Human
Resources.  Responses by chairpersons, directors and deans must be
appealed by the faculty/academic staff member within thirty (30)
calendars days following receipt of response(s).  Failure to appeal
means that the matter is concluded on the basis of the last response
under the Administrative Review Procedure.\
\
[Back to Faculty
Handbook](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/4Section-HR-Policies.html)
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/administrative_review.pcf)
