---
title: 'Administrators, Selection of University Level'
---

::: {#body}
Faculty Handbook

**Administrators, Selection of University Level**

 Last updated: 4/20/1983

::: {xmlns=""}
**IV. ACADEMIC HUMAN RESOURCES POLICIES (Cont.)**
:::

**PROCEDURES FOR FACULTY AND STUDENT PARTICIPATION IN THE SELECTION OF
SPECIFIED UNIVERSITY LEVEL ADMINISTRATORS**

*The following procedure was approved by the Academic Council, as
amended, on January 25, 1983; under the terms of the **Bylaws for
Academic Governance**, section 3.2.5.5, it was approved by the President
on April 20, 1983.*

**1. General Principles**

1.1 The selection of University administrators is a matter of great
importance to the University. The President and Provost normally seek
advice on such matters through a variety of appropriate channels,
individuals, and groups. Participation of faculty and students in the
selection of those administrators who significantly affect the academic
programs of the University is provided by the procedure described below
in accord with provision 3.2.5. of the Bylaws for Academic Governance.

1.2 The process of selecting certain University level administrators who
make decisions that significantly affect the academic programs of the
University shall include participation by faculty and students.

1.3 Consistent with the principle of participation by faculty and
students, the President and Provost have the fundamental responsibility
for initiating the selection process and seeing the process through to
the end. It is the responsibility of the President to make
recommendations of appointments to the Board of Trustees.

1.4 The President or the Provost will seek the advice of the Steering
Committee regarding the procedure to be utilized as soon as possible
when a vacancy occurs or is anticipated in one of the positions
identified on lists A and B below, as an office at the University level
which has responsibilities significantly affecting the academic program
of the University. These lists will be reviewed periodically in
consultation with the Steering Committee. The Steering Committee or the
President or the Provost may propose modifications to the lists.

::: {xmlns=""}
-   Administrators who report to the President
    -   Provost
    -   Vice President for Research and Graduate Studies
    -   Vice President for Student Affairs and Services
-   Administrators who report to the Provost
    -   Dean, International Studies and Programs
    -   Associate Provost for University Outreach and Engagement
    -   Director, Libraries
    -   Director, Honors College
    -   Associate Provost for Graduate Education and Dean of the
        Graduate School (reports jointly to the Vice President for
        Research and Graduate Studies)

1.5 When advising the President or the Provost regarding a specific
procedure to be used, the Steering Committee shall consult with the
Faculty Senate. Consultation with the Faculty Senate shall take place
prior to final Steering Committee advice to the President or the
Provost.
:::

1.6 An advisory committee will be appointed by the President or Provost
to provide them with evaluations or recommendations on individuals under
consideration. The Steering Committee shall advise the President or the
Provost on the general composition and specific membership of the
advisory committee.

**2. Procedures for and Composition of Advisory Committees**

2.1 The advisory committee shall consist primarily or wholly of faculty
and students, and shall include women and minorities. Selected members
who might be judged appropriate by the Steering Committee   may be
added. All persons or groups involved in selecting or identifying the
members of a special advisory committee share the responsibility of
including women and minority committee members.

2.2 At the beginning of a selection process, the President or the
Provost shall consult the Steering Committee on who shall have the
responsibility for posting the position, receiving applications, making
contacts, checking references, arranging interviews, etc. Usually, the
President or designee, or the Provost or designee, will assume
responsibility.

2.3 In order to assure administrative continuity and avoid unnecessary
reliance on acting appointees, the selection process should be conducted
expeditiously. Therefore, any advisory committee must not only be
appropriately representative but small enough to work on an appropriate
time schedule.

2.4 The special advisory committee and others involved in the procedure
should be aware of and carefully consider current issues relevant to the
position to be filled. To this end, a direct discussion or series of
discussions should be undertaken with the President or the Provost to
determine their view on the position and the qualifications required of
candidates.

2.5 The selection process must assure that, where appropriate, the names
of persons willing to be considered and related documentation shall be
kept confidential.

2.6 The evaluation or recommendation of the advisory committee will be
presented to the President or Provost with the candidate or candidates
identified as acceptable or unacceptable and with evaluative comments
about each. The President/Provost should notify the advisory committee
of the decision made with respect to the person to be appointed,
regardless of whether that individual was identified as acceptable or
unacceptable, and then meet with the committee to explain the decision.

2.7 MSU academic hiring policies and procedures apply to these
positions. The Board of Trustees\' approved guidelines for hiring
principal administrative personnel also apply to the positions in list
A.

**3. Acting Administrators**

3.1 The responsibility for the appointment of acting administrators
rests with the administrator to whom the acting appointee reports. The
President or the Provost shall consult with the Steering Committee 
regarding such appointments.

3.2 The appointment of an acting officer shall not be used by either the
acting administrator or the officer to whom that person reports to bias
the selection of a permanent appointee.\
\
[Back to Faculty
Handbook](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/4Section-HR-Policies.html)
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/administrator_selection.pcf)
