---
title: 'Annual Evaluation of Chairpersons/Directors'
---

::: {#body}
Faculty Handbook

**Annual Evaluation of Chairpersons/Directors**

 Last updated: 9/21/1981

**IV. ACADEMIC HUMAN RESOURCES POLICIES *(Cont.)***

::: {xmlns=""}
*This policy was issued by the Office of the Provost on September 21,
1981.*

Annual performance evaluations to assess unit administrator performance
have been formally instituted in each college and separately reporting
unit. Annual performance evaluations generally occur near the end of the
academic year, may be combined with the annual assessment of unit
administrators for merit salary adjustments, and the results of each
individual evaluation should be shared with the unit administrator
evaluated. All aspects of performance, including equal
opportunity/affirmative action, should be evaluated for each unit
administrator. No specific procedure is required for these annual
performance evaluations, as approaches may vary in the
colleges/separately reporting units. A copy of the evaluation instrument
(criteria) currently used by each dean (director) in annual evaluations
must be filed with the Office of the Provost prior to each annual cycle
of evaluations. Annually, each dean or separately reporting director
will be asked to inform the Office of the Provost that an annual
performance evaluation for each unit administrator has been completed.
Deans and separately reporting directors will retain documentation on
file in their offices concerning the process and outcomes of these
annual performance evaluations.\
\
[Back to Faculty
Handbook](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/4Section-HR-Policies.html)
:::
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/annual_evaluation.pcf)
