---
title: Abrogation of Faculty Teaching Responsibility
---

::: {#body}
Faculty Handbook

**Abrogation of Faculty Teaching Responsibility**

 Last updated: 6/12/1987

**V. INSTRUCTION *(Cont.)* ^1^**

*The following policy was accepted by the Board of Trustees on September
20, 1970 and revised on June 12, 1987:*

Any member of the instructional staff^2^ **^ ^** who fails to fulfill
any provision of the University\'s *Code of Teaching
Responsibility* shall be held accountable.

It is the responsibility of the department chairpersons, school
directors, and deans to ensure that students are provided the
instruction to which they are entitled. All absences by instructional
staff should be covered by other instructional staff, where possible and
appropriate, so that students will not lose instructional time.

It is the responsibility of department chairpersons and school directors
to determine if services have been withheld without proper cause and, if
so, to report the precise details of such alleged withholding of
services. This report should be made to the dean of the college, with a
copy to the Provost, and should include information as to the total load
of the instructional staff member so that an estimate can be made of the
percentage of service that has been allegedly withheld. The Provost or
designee shall review the contents of the report with the dean of the
college and the applicable department chairperson/school director and
shall discuss the matter with the affected instructional staff
member.^3 ^The Provost or his/her designee shall determine if the
withholding of services was improper and may direct an appropriate
deduction from the instructional staff member\'s salary. The
instructional staff member, academic staff member, or graduate assistant
shall be informed of this action in writing.

If the faculty or academic staff member believes that the action is a
violation, misinterpretation, or misapplication of existing University
policies and legislation, he/she may initiate a grievance under
the [Faculty Grievance
Policy](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/grievance_policy.html "Faculty Grievance Policy ").
Graduate assistants may initiate a grievance in accordance with judicial
procedures stipulated in the document entitled [Graduate Students\'
Rights and
Responsibilities](https://grad.msu.edu/gsrr "Graduate Student Rights & Responsibilities").

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Footnotes:**

**^1 ^** In this policy, \"Provost\" means \"Office of the Provost\" and
that the Associate Provost and Associate Vice President for Academic
Human Resources (or other administrator in the Provost\'s Office) has
been delegated responsibility for this role in order to clearly separate
any future decision making required by the Provost pursuant to the
Faculty Grievance Policy with respect to implementation/enforcement of
this policy.

::: {xmlns=""}
**^2 ^** If the instructional staff member is not available for this
conference, the procedure continues without this participation by the
instructional staff member. A reasonable effort shall be made by the
Provost to arrange for this conference.

**^3 ^** The term *instructional staff* includes tenure system faculty,
graduate assistants and all other individuals holding academic personnel
system appointments.\
\
[Back to Faculty
Handbook](https://hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/5Section-Instruction.html)
:::
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/arbogatin_faculty_teaching.pcf)
