---
title: Conflict of Interest In Educational Responsibilities
---

::: {#body}
Faculty Handbook

**Conflict of Interest In Educational Responsibilities**

 Last updated: 11/8/1996

**III. UNIVERSITY POLICIES (*Cont.*)**

**CONFLICT OF INTEREST IN EDUCATIONAL RESPONSIBILITIES RESULTING FROM
CONSENSUAL AMOROUS OR SEXUAL RELATIONSHIPS** ^1, 2^

*This policy was approved by the Board of Trustees on November 8, 1996.*

An amorous or sexual relationship between a student and a faculty
member, a graduate teaching assistant or another University employee who
has educational responsibility for that student may impair or undermine
the ongoing trust needed for effective teaching, learning and
professional development. Because of the faculty member, graduate
assistant or other employee\'s authority or power over the student,
inherently conflicting interests and perceptions of unfair advantage
arise when a faculty member, graduate teaching assistant or other
employee assumes or maintains educational responsibility for a student
with whom the faculty member, graduate teaching assistant or other
employee has engaged in amorous or sexual relations.

It is, therefore, the policy of Michigan State University that each
faculty member, graduate teaching assistant and other University
employee who has educational responsibilities for students shall not
assume or maintain educational responsibility for a student with whom
the faculty member, graduate teaching assistant or other employee has
engaged in amorous or sexual relations, even if such relations were
consensual. Whether such amorous or sexual relationships predate the
assumption of educational responsibility for the student, or arise out
of the educational relationship, the faculty member, graduate teaching
assistant or other employee shall immediately disclose the amorous or
sexual relationship to the relevant unit administrator, who shall
promptly arrange other oversight for the student.

In unusual circumstances, the achievement of the affected student\'s
academic requirements may necessitate continued oversight of the
affected student by the faculty member, graduate teaching assistant or
other University employee who has engaged in amorous or sexual relations
with that student. In such circumstances the unit administrator shall,
therefore, have authority, after consulting the affected student, to
permit the continued oversight of the affected student by the faculty
member, graduate teaching assistant or other University employee,
provided that the faculty member, graduate teaching assistant or other
University employee shall not grade or otherwise evaluate, or
participate in the grading or other evaluation of, the work of the
affected student, and that the alternative arrangements for grading or
evaluating the affected student\'s work treat the student comparably to
other students.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Footnotes:**

**^1 ^** The Board of Trustees approved this policy statement on
November 8, 1996. The Board of Trustees adopted a subsequent motion
which emphasized the view of the Board that consensual amorous or sexual
relations between faculty and students are discouraged.

**^2 ^** Other relevant policies include \"Supervision of Academic Work
by Relatives\" and \"Conflict of Interest in Employment\".\
\
[Back to Faculty
Handbook](https://hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/3Section-University-Policies.html)
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/COI_EdResponsibilities.pcf)
