---
title: Emeritus
---

::: {#body}
Faculty Handbook

**Emeritus**

 Last updated: 4/5/1991

**IV. ACADEMIC HUMAN RESOURCES POLICIES *(Cont.)***

*The following policy was approved by the Board of Trustees on May 18,
1950 and revised on April 5, 1991.*

Members of the faculty, academic staff and administrative staff who
leave the University with official retirement status are granted certain
privileges and the \"emeritus\" title. For faculty members with the rank
of professor, associate professor or assistant professor, the
\"emeritus\" designation is appended to the rank held at the time of
retirement, e.g., professor emeritus. For academic staff the title would
be librarian emeritus, etc. For administrators whose administrative
appointment requires approval by the Board of Trustees and for all
executive managers, the emeritus designation, upon approval by the
Provost and the President, is appended only to the most senior
administrative title held at Michigan State University, which may be
held at or prior to the time of retirement, e.g., dean emeritus. The
emeritus designation is not normally awarded for administrative titles
held on an \"acting\" basis.

Faculty with the emeritus designation are entitled to attend Academic
Senate meetings with voice but without vote; to march in academic
processions such as commencement; to receive the MSU News-Bulletin; to
avail themselves of the libraries; to receive, on application, a faculty
vehicle permit; to represent the University, on appointment, at academic
ceremonies of other institutions; and, in general, to take part in the
social and ceremonial functions of the University.\
\
[Back to Faculty
Handbook](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/4Section-HR-Policies.html)
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/emeritus.pcf)
