---
title: 'MSU Excellence-In-Teaching Citations for Graduate Teaching Assistants'
---

::: {#body}
Faculty Handbook

**MSU Excellence-In-Teaching Citations for Graduate Teaching
Assistants**

**IV. ACADEMIC HUMAN RESOURCES POLICIES *(Cont.)***

MSU Excellence-In-Teaching Citations are made to six graduate teaching
assistants who have distinguished themselves by the care they have given
and the skill they have shown in meeting their classroom
responsibilities. The essential purpose of the citation is to bring
University-wide recognition to the best of the graduate teaching
assistants and by so doing to underline the qualitative contribution
which they are making to the undergraduate program.

Nominations must be endorsed by the chairperson of the
department/director of the school in which the teaching assistant\'s
instructional responsibilities have been discharged.  When this is not
the department/school in which the nominee is a candidate for a degree,
the chairperson/director of the degree department/school must endorse
the nomination.  In every instance the nomination must be accompanied by
a letter of recommendation from the faculty member who has supervisory
responsibility for the graduate teaching assistant.  Individual
departments/schools will ordinarily make a single nomination each year,
but the larger departments/schools may make as many as three.  \"At
large\" nominations are also invited from an appropriate student
organization.  All nominations are reviewed by a college screening
committee, which may  forward the number of nominations as indicated in
the table below.

To be nominated for an MSU Excellence-In-Teaching Citation, the teaching
assistant must have held at least a quarter-time graduate teaching
assistantship for a minimum of one semester at the time of nomination.
In addition the nominee must have assumed a significant measure of
responsibility for the conduct of undergraduate courses, whether in
lecture, recitation or laboratory sections.  Special tutorial or seminar
teaching will also be recognized by the citations committee.

  ------------------------------------------ -------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Number of Teaching Assistants in College   Maximum Number of Excellence-in-Teaching Nominations forwarded by the College
  Less than 100                              2
  100-199                                    3
  200-299                                    4
  300-399                                    5
  More than 399                              7
  ------------------------------------------ -------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Additional information can be found
at <http://www.ahr.msu.edu/all-university-awards>.\
\
[Back to Faculty
Handbook](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/4Section-HR-Policies.html)
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/excellence-in-teaching_awards.pcf)
