---
title: 'Principles of Faculty Reassignment (Position Elimination)'
---

::: {#body}
Faculty Handbook

**Principles of Faculty Reassignment (Position Elimination)**

 Last updated: 4/27/1994

**IV. ACADEMIC HUMAN RESOURCES POLICIES *(Cont.)***

*This statement was approved by the University Committee on Faculty
Tenure on April 27, 1994.*

The intention of this document is to provide procedural guidance to the
Provost if it becomes necessary to consider the dissolution or
curtailment of a department, college or other academic unit in which
tenured faculty members are primarily assigned. It is taken as a given
that tenure at Michigan State University resides in the University and
tenured faculty have \"tenure in the university.\"

**Principle One:** Faculty rights under the tenure system shall be
preserved in reassignments. These rights include the entitlement of
faculty to engage in teaching, research, service and full participation
in governance in accordance with the custom of the receiving unit.
Reassignment would require appointment in an academic unit rather than a
dean\'s office, institute or non-academic unit. However, reassignment to
a dean\'s office, institute or non-academic unit may occur, generally,
by mutual agreement and under conditions amicable to the reassignee. The
reassignee shall have a level of professional responsibility similar to
that borne by faculty members already in the receiving unit. Ordinarily
there is a variation in duties across faculty within a unit, and
reassigned faculty are expected to fall within the existing range. Rank,
salary and benefits of the reassigned faculty shall be fully maintained.

**Principle Two:** The Provost must in all cases of reassignment
negotiate in good faith with the faculty member and the potential
receiving unit to seek arrangements which are amicable and beneficial to
all. The Provost and the administrators of the outgoing
department/school or college shall assist faculty members in identifying
potential receiving department/schools or colleges in the University.
Throughout the process of reassignment, faculty rights under the tenure
system shall be preserved.

**Principle Three:** Every potential receiving unit shall evaluate each
potentially reassigned faculty member for appointment according to the
applicable procedures used for appointment recommendations set forth in
University policies and procedures. The Provost shall review
documentation that demonstrates that the receiving unit has implemented
the principle of faculty participation through consultation, evaluation,
and final recommendation.

**Principle Four:** In evaluating affected tenured faculty members for
assignment to a receiving academic unit, both the Provost and the
administrators of the former and potential receiving units shall make a
good faith effort to negotiate the reassignment. Administrators in the
potential receiving units shall urge their faculty to consider
especially carefully the broader social good that derives from having
tenure in the university in cases in which reassignment results from
dissolution or curtailment of a department or school.

**Principle Five:** The Provost shall receive in writing any compromise
in assignment, responsibilities or duties agreed to by the faculty
member and receiving unit(s).

**Principle Six:** If the assignment to a unit by the Provost entails
duties which compromise Principle One, above, the Provost must seek to
assure that it is with the full, voluntary consent of the reassignee and
the receiving unit. (For example it would be appropriate to reassign a
tenured faculty member to a non-college unit if the assignee and the
unit agree. A reassignee may also be reassigned into two or more units
if both the reassignee and the units agree).

**Principle Seven:** Should previous attempts at good faith negotiations
yield no resolution, the Provost may impose a 30 day deadline for
mutual, voluntary agreement on a reassignment. If units and faculty
members are unable, after the 30-day period, to achieve a resolution
regarding appointments, assignments, salary, rank, responsibilities, or
duties, the Provost shall impose a solution.

**Principle Eight:** While nothing shall preclude shifts between units
based on voluntary agreement between all relevant parties, the Provost
and the University have no special responsibility to reassign faculty
who desire a unit change for reasons other than the dissolution or
curtailment of their academic unit.\
\
[Back to Faculty
Handbook](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/4Section-HR-Policies.html)
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/faculty_reassignment.pcf)
