---
title: 'Fixed-Term Appointment - Faculty Handbook'
---

::: {#body}
Faculty Handbook

**Fixed-Term Appointment**

 Last updated: 7/1/2012

**IV. ACADEMIC HUMAN RESOURCES POLICIES ***(Cont.)***\
**

**This policy was issued by the Office of the Provost with an effective
date of January 11, 1980 and revised on March 1, 2010 and July 1, 2012.\
**

Visiting and fixed-term faculty members are appointed outside the tenure
system on an academic year or annual basis with nine- or twelve-month
duty assignments or for shorter periods. The Office of the Provost will
endorse appointment recommendations to appoint individuals on a
fixed-term basis (with ending date) with the rank of instructor,
assistant professor, associate professor, and professor only in
instances in which the primary recommending unit is an academic
department (a department in a college or colleges) and/or a school
and/or a college. (Faculty Status: Reserved for Appointments in Primary
Academic Units of the University, effective January 11, 1980.) The ranks
of specialist, research associate, senior research associate, librarian,
lecturer, and assistant instructor may be used for fixed-term academic
staff appointments. See [University approved ranks and
titles.](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/academic-hiring-manual/academic_titles.html "University Approved ranks & titles")

Individuals appointed with the title of postdoctoral fellow or research
associate must have a doctoral degree (Ph.D., Ed.D., M.D., D.O., D.V.M.)
or its equivalent. A copy of the individual\'s diploma or transcript or
a letter indicating receipt of the degree from the Dean of the Graduate
School or other appropriate University official must be submitted with
the initial appointment as a postdoctoral fellow or research associate.

All fixed-term appointments have a specific termination date.
Appointments are normally for a period of one year or less;
occasionally, fixed-term appointments may be for multiple year periods.
Appointments longer than one year require prior approval by the Office
of the Provost. Employment as a research associate is limited to a
maximum of 60 full time equivalent service months. The University has no
obligation to provide reappointment or extension of a fixed-term
appointment beyond the ending date. If reappointment is made,
negotiation of the conditions of reappointment must originate with the
basic administrative unit (department, school, institute, residential
college, or other comparable academic unit.)

An individual who holds a fixed term appointment may be dismissed prior
to the expiration of the period set forth on the appointment paperwork
for incompetence or for serious personal or professional misconduct,
including, but not limited to, failure to carry out assigned duties,
theft or misuse of University property, acts of moral turpitude,
insubordination, intellectual dishonesty, use of professional authority
to exploit others, or violation of University rules and regulations.
Prior to dismissal, the unit administrator shall confer with the
dean/separately reporting director and Office of the Provost. The
employee shall be provided with written notice of the reason(s) for
dismissal, projected date of dismissal, and an opportunity to respond.
Disciplinary action other than dismissal may be imposed after the unit
administrator has conferred with the dean/separately reporting director
and has provided the employee with written notice of the pending
disciplinary action, reason(s) for the disciplinary action, and an
opportunity to respond. Upon dismissal or other disciplinary action, the
unit administrator shall provide the employee with receive written
notice of his/her right to file a grievance under applicable University
grievance procedures.

New appointments made to fixed term positions on or after March 1, 2010
and reappointments made on or after July 1, 2012 can be terminated prior
to the expiration of the appointment period for unforeseen budgetary
reasons. Ordinarily, a fixed term position will be eliminated for
financial reasons at the end of the current appointment period. However,
when budgetary circumstances warrant elimination of a fixed term
position prior to the ending date of the current appointment, the
employee shall be notified in writing of the effective date of his/her
termination at least thirty days prior to the effective date of
separation.\
\
[Back to Faculty
Handbook](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/4Section-HR-Policies.html)
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/FixedTermApp.pcf)
