---
title: 'Doctoral Program Guidance Committee, Composition'
---

::: {#body}
Faculty Handbook

**Doctoral Program Guidance Committee, Composition**

**V. INSTRUCTION *(Cont.)***

Each graduate student admitted to a doctoral program has the
responsibility to form a guidance committee with the approval and the
assistance of the department or school chairperson or director or
designated representative. The guidance committee will consist of at
least four Michigan State University regular faculty, **^1 ^** at least
three of whom, including the committee chairperson, possess an earned
doctoral degree, preferably of the same type that the student is seeking
(for example, Ph.D.). **^2^**  An exception may be granted by the Dean
of The Graduate School to allow a non-tenure stream faculty member or an
academic specialist to serve on a doctoral student\'s guidance committee
as one of the four required faculty members or as the chairperson of a
doctoral student\'s guidance committee. With the approval of the
chairperson or director of the department or school, an exception may be
granted to allow an Emeritus faculty member to serve as one of the four
required faculty members on a doctoral student\'s guidance committee; in
addition, an Emeritus faculty member may continue to serve as the
chairperson of a guidance committee. More than four persons may be
members of the guidance committee. Persons who are not MSU regular
faculty who can contribute to the student\'s program may serve as
members of the guidance committee and assist in the work of the
committee, providing that the number of such persons does not exceed the
number of regular faculty on the committee. In consultation with the
student, the guidance committee plans the entire program, including
examinations, and thereafter supervises it, making modifications as
needed until the degree is completed.

The guidance committee shall be formed within the first two semesters of
doctoral study, or within two semesters beyond the master\'s degree or
its equivalent. Within one semester after the committee has met, the
chairperson of the guidance committee shall file a guidance committee
report with the dean of the college, listing all degree requirements. A
copy of this guidance committee report shall also be given to the
graduate student. This guidance committee report, as changed or amended
in full consultation between the graduate student and the committee and
approved by the appropriate department or school chairperson or director
and the dean of the college, shall be regarded as the statement of
program requirements. The program will not be considered binding unless
signed by the student.

The guidance committee report includes a statement of the student\'s
proposed program, with a timetable and tentative dissertation topic. In
the report, the committee also recommends whether to accept any graduate
credit beyond the master\'s degree level that was taken at other
institutions; whether any study may be done *in absentia,* and under
what conditions; what language examinations or alternative program, if
any, the student must complete; and which member of the committee should
later direct the research that is to form the basis of the student\'s
dissertation.

Once designated, the guidance committee has the responsibility to meet
periodically to oversee the graduate student\'s progress for as long as
the graduate student continues in good standing. Any desired or required
changes in the membership of the guidance committee may be made by the
graduate student with the concurrence of the unit chairperson or
director or designated representative, or by the unit with the
concurrence of the graduate student in accordance with University,
college, and unit policy. The membership of the guidance committee, with
the concurrence of the graduate student, may be changed as appropriate
to the dissertation topic. Guidance committee chairpersons on leave
shall provide for the necessary guidance of their advisees during their
absence.

The guidance committee is responsible for insuring the adequacy of the
overall program, in keeping with the general policy that three or more
academic years of study and research beyond the bachelor\'s degree are
required.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

::: {xmlns=""}
**Footnote:**
:::

**^1 ^** The \"regular faculty\" of Michigan State University shall
consist of all persons appointed under the rules of tenure and holding
the rank of professor, associate professor, assistant professor, or
instructor, and persons appointed as librarians. In addition, the
principal administrative officer of each major educational and research
unit of the University shall be a member of the \"regular faculty.\"

**^2 ^** For the DMA degree, the guidance committee will consist of at
least four regular MSU faculty, at least two of whom, including the
committee chairperson, possess the DMA degree.\
\
[Back to Faculty
Handbook](https://hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/5Section-Instruction.html)
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/guidance_committee.pcf)
