---
title: Guidelines for Academic Unit Peer Review Committee Composition
---

::: {#body}
Faculty Handbook

**Guidelines for Academic Unit Peer Review Committee Composition**

 Last updated: 5/5/1993

**IV. ACADEMIC HUMAN RESOURCES POLICIES *(Cont.)***

*The following advisory statement was issued by the Office of the
Provost on December 2, 1987 and revised on May 5, 1993.*

**University Policy**

Each academic unit (department, school, non-departmentally organized
college) is charged to establish procedures so that its faculty can
provide advice to the academic administrator regarding recommendations
for various academic personnel actions, e.g., merit salary increases,
appointments, reappointments, promotion, and tenure. Advisory procedures
in matters of appointment, reappointment and promotion and tenure must
involve peer review usually reflected in the work of faculty committees
which may vary in size and composition, although in some cases faculty
advice is sought individually. For merit salary increases, peer review
advice also is required, but procedures may range from faculty advice to
the chairperson or director on standards and criteria to specific
commentary on individual faculty by an elected peer review committee. In
all cases the academic unit administrator at a minimum is required to
obtain the advice of the unit faculty on merit salary standards,
criteria and procedures. For example, Section 2.1.2.1., of the Michigan
State University *Bylaws for Academic Governance*, states that a
department chairperson or school director \"is responsible for the
educational, research, and service programs, budgetary matters, physical
facilities, and personnel matters in his or her jurisdiction, taking
into account the advisory procedures of the unit.\"

The policy statement on non-tenured faculty in the tenure system also
states that the bylaws of each basic administrative unit: \"shall
provide for a designated group to make recommendations with respect to
reappointment, tenure, or promotion\" (Michigan State
University *Faculty Handbook*).

**Guidelines for Peer Review Committee Composition**

These guidelines have been developed in consultation with and the
concurrence of the Council of Deans, the University Committee on Faculty
Affairs, and the University Committee on Faculty Tenure (for the latter
on tenure matters only).

The members of the Council of Deans agree to seek implementation of the
guidelines set forth below within the specific bylaws or other
procedures established for the applicable peer review process in
academic units within their area of responsibility:

::: {xmlns=""}
1.  Eligibility for membership on academic unit peer review committees
    should be limited to individuals appointed in the tenure system at
    Michigan State University and/or at peer higher educational
    institutions.
2.  Eligibility for membership in academic unit peer review committees,
    to the fullest extent possible and particularly for personnel
    actions involving the award of tenure, should be limited to
    individuals holding tenured faculty appointments at Michigan State
    University and/or at peer higher education institutions.
3.  The composition of an academic unit peer review committee should be
    representative of that unit\'s diverse academic interests. 
    Additionally, unit selection procedures should include provisions to
    encourage participation by women and minority faculty members. 
    Specific procedures for involvement should be developed as
    consistent with University procedures, college/academic unit bylaws
    and practice and may include, but are not limited to, the following
    possible arrangements:
    -   Regular peer review committee membership.
    -   Service as a consultant to the peer review committee (with or
        without vote).
    -   Participation in the pool of individuals from both within and
        outside Michigan State University identified by the academic
        unit, in accordance with regular procedures, to evaluate the
        candidate\'s record.
    -   Service as a member of or a consultant to (with or without vote)
        a college-level peer review committee (if such a body exists).
    -   Participation in the pool of individuals from both within and
        outside of Michigan State University identified by the
        college-level peer review committee and/or dean to evaluate the
        candidate\'s record.

[Back to Faculty
Handbook](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/4Section-HR-Policies.html)
:::
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/guidelines_peer-review.pcf)
