---
title: Leave of Absence Without Pay
---

::: {#body}
Faculty Handbook

**Leave of Absence Without Pay**

::: {xmlns=""}
**VII. FACULTY AND ACADEMIC STAFF BENEFIT AND RETIREMENT PROGRAMS
(*Cont.*)**
:::

**WITHOUT PAY**

Faculty/academic staff granted an approved leave of absence without pay
may continue in force the optional benefit programs by paying the full
cost of all premiums. The same University contribution toward the dental
premium continues for up to 24 months while on a leave of absence
without pay. Coverage for other optional benefits may be continued by
making cash payments for as long as the approved leave continues.
Payments for benefits to be kept in force should be made directly to
Michigan State University and sent to the [Human Resources Solutions
Center](https://www.hr.msu.edu/contact/index.html "Contact Info") no
later than the first day of the month for which the payment is due.
Optional benefits not maintained will be reinstated upon return to
active employment in an eligible benefits status.

A faculty/academic staff member on a Family Medical Leave (FMLA) will
have their health and dental benefits continued at the same level and
with the same premium contribution as prior to the FMLA leave. Any share
of premiums which had been paid by the individual prior to the leave
must continue to be paid during the leave, otherwise coverage will be
canceled.

Faculty/academic staff member contributions for the 403(b) Base
Retirement Program will be suspended during the period of the leave.

Provisions are available to faculty/academic staff members on leave due
to acceptance of prestigious awards or fellowships for the continuation
of applicable University benefits. Additional information should be
requested from MSU Human Resources. (See [Continuation of Benefits for
Faculty on Leave of Absence No Pay Status to Receive Prestigious Awards,
Fellowships and/or Special Assignment
Opportunities](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/LOA_continuation_benefits.html "Continuation of Benefits").)\
\
[Back to Faculty
Handbook](https://hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/7Section-Benefits.html)
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/loa_without_pay.pcf)
