---
title: 'Medical Leave (Short and Long-Term Disability)'
---

::: {#body}
Faculty Handbook

**Medical Leave (Short and Long-Term Disability)**

 Last updated: 1/1/2000

**IV. ACADEMIC HUMAN RESOURCES POLICIES *(Cont.)***

**Short-Term Disability**

*This policy was issued by the Office of the Provost in 1978 and revised
in 2000.*

Faculty and academic staff members who are appointed on a full time
basis^1 ^are eligible for up to six months of paid leave if health
problems prevent the individual from working. (Normally, short term
disability leave related to pregnancy, childbirth and/or recovery is for
six weeks, but  may be longer with proper medical certification^2 ^). 
It is the responsibility of the individual faculty/academic staff member
to promptly notify the department chairperson, director, or immediate
supervisor of absence due to illness or disability.

If other members of the faculty/academic staff assume the duties of the
individual on a temporary basis without additional cost to the
University, no formal report of the absence beyond the dean or director
of the major academic unit is required during a four week period.

If the absence extends or is expected to extend beyond four weeks, a
leave of absence beginning with the first day of absence should be
requested by the individual or if the individual is unable to make the
request, by the department chairperson or director, through the office
of the dean to the provost for reporting to the president and Board of
Trustees. The leave of absence form must be accompanied by medical
certification specifying the dates of the period of disability.

Faculty/academic staff returning from medical leave may be required to
obtain approval from the attending physician before returning to work.

**Long-Term Disability**

If disability of a faculty or academic staff member appointed for nine
months or more on a full-time basis extends or is likely to extend
beyond 180 days, Human Resources should be contacted immediately for
information on applying for benefits under the Long-Term Disability plan
and Social Security. (See [Long-Term Disability: An Interpretation of
the Tenure
Rules](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/long-term_disability.html "Long term disability").)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

::: {xmlns=""}
**Footnote:**
:::

**^1 ^** Short-term medical leave also applies to part-time faculty and
academic staff members appointed for 50 percent or more time for nine
months or more.

^**2 **^ In such cases of short term disability leave, additional leave
under the Parental Leave policy for faculty and academic staff may be
provided.  Note that the combination of Short Term Disability and
Parental leave replaces the 12 weeks normally provided by the Maternity
Leave policy, which has been discontinued.\
\
[Back to Faculty
Handbook](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/4Section-HR-Policies.html)
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/medical_leave.pcf)
