---
title: |
    Modified Duties Policy for Tenure System and Health Programs Faculty
    with New Dependent Children
---

::: {#body}
Faculty Handbook

**Modified Duties Policy for Tenure System and Health Programs Faculty
with New Dependent Children**

 Last updated: 4/1/2011

 **IV. ACADEMIC HUMAN RESOURCES POLICIES**\
*\
This policy was issued by the Office of the Provost on April 1, 2011 (to
be effective Fall semester 2011); it reflects advice by the Faculty
Council and the University Committee on Faculty Affairs*

### Academic Human Resources Policy^1^ {#academic-human-resources-policy1 xmlns=""}

This policy addresses the balance of commitments of family and
professional work that arise when a tenure system or Health Programs
faculty member is responsible for teaching^2 ^and a new child enters the
home. Such faculty are permitted to request a modified workload and
flexible schedule for up to one semester, within twelve months after the
child enters the home.

Upon request, tenure system and Health Programs faculty members who have
a new child (or new children) in the home under the age of 6 and not
attending school full-time may be granted a period of modified duties
for up to one semester without a reduction in effort and salary.
Eligibility for modified duties is in addition to any paid short-term
disability and/or parental leaves received by the faculty member. If
approved, the department/school (and/or College) is responsible for
arranging for coverage of direct teaching responsibilities for the
period of modified duties.

#### Description of Modified Duties {#description-of-modified-duties xmlns=""}

The period of modified duties is not a leave of absence. Faculty members
with modified duties status will generally be relieved of teaching but
will be expected to be fully employed by fulfilling their other
professional responsibilities that can be scheduled around the child's
needs at a higher percentage of effort (e.g. preparation of research
proposals, papers, and course materials; supervision of graduate student
research; and academic service.^3^) A written statement of all duties
and related expectations must be agreed upon by both the department
chairperson/school director and faculty member. For faculty members with
significant direct clinical responsibilities, limited teaching
obligations, or for whom teaching is integral to the provision of
clinical care, other modifications appropriate to the circumstances may
be negotiated between the faculty member and the department
chairperson/school director.

Because the period of modified duties is not a leave, it is not subject
to any requirement for payback. Modification of duties must not result
in additional duties during the subsequent semester (i.e., the faculty
member may not be asked to make up the released teaching before or after
the period of modified duties).

A period of modified duties does not automatically change the tenure
system probationary appointment end date. The probationary appointment
end date may be extended under the provisions of the policy on Extending
the Reappointment/Promotion/Tenure Review Timeline ([Extending the
Tenure
Clock](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/tenure_timeline_extension.html "Stopping the Tenure Clock")).

#### Expectations During Modified Duties {#expectations-during-modified-duties xmlns=""}

During the period of modified duties, faculty members will be expected
to remain available to their colleagues and students, including
continuation of responsibilities for which the faculty member is
uniquely qualified, such as advising doctoral candidates. The period of
modified duties cannot be used for extensive professional travel or
other increased professional activities (including consulting) that do
not meet the goals of the policy. (Absences from the community require
any usual approvals that may be mandated by the department/school and
college.)

#### Duration of Modified Duties {#duration-of-modified-duties xmlns=""}

The maximum period for which modified duties will be assigned is up to
one semester, or an equivalent amount of time for those faculty members
whose responsibilities are not tied directly to teaching on the academic
calendar. The period of modified duties must occur in the time period
beginning on the date the child first enters the home and ending the day
immediately prior to this anniversary date. This limit applies even if
more than one child has entered the home (as in the case of a multiple
birth or the simultaneous adoption of more than one child). If both
parents are in the same department, they would generally be expected to
request modified duties in different semesters.

### Procedures {#procedures xmlns=""}

Faculty members must submit a written request for modified duties as
early as possible so the department/school can plan appropriately. The
request should be made no later than three months (earlier if possible)
in advance of the affected semester or activities.

This will allow time for the department/school to identify alternate
faculty to teach the affected courses, if relevant, or to make
arrangements for coverage of other duties.

The request must include the following information:

-   Statement that the faculty member is the primary, or a co-equal
    caregiver
-   Date the child entered (or is estimated to enter) the home
-   Requested period of modified duties
-   Reason(s) for modified duties
-   A plan of proposed activities, developed in consultation with the
    department chairperson/school director. (Once approved, modified
    duties may be changed only with the written agreement of the faculty
    member and the department chairperson/school director)

Policy implementation and funding are the responsibility of the
department/school and/or college. While there is an expectation that
modified duty requests will be granted, the policy does not create an
entitlement if there are legitimate business reasons for denying a
faculty member's request. The request must be approved by the department
chairperson/school director and dean. If the department
chairperson/school director does not support the request, reasons for
denial shall be provided in writing and the request shall be
automatically forwarded to the dean and the Associate Provost for
Academic Human Resources for further review and decision.

[Application for Modified
Duties](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/documents/APPforMODIFIEDduties.pdf "Application for Modified Duties")

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 ^1^Applies to situations including the birth of a child, adoption of a
child, temporary custody of a child and foster care.

 ^2^Unlike most responsibilities, teaching responsibilities are held to
a rigid schedule, whereas other responsibilities (i.e., advising,
research) might provide more flexibility.

 ^3^If academic service expectations require frequent on-campus
attendance, modifications may be negotiated as well.\
\
[Back to Faculty
Handbook](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/4Section-HR-Policies.html)\
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/modified_duties.pcf)
