---
title: 'Non-Tenured Faculty in the Tenure System'
---

::: {#body}
Faculty Handbook

**Non-Tenured Faculty in the Tenure System**

 Last updated: 4/17/1970

::: {xmlns=""}
**IV. ACADEMIC HUMAN RESOURCES POLICIES (*Cont.*)**
:::

*The following policy was approved by the Board of Trustees on April 17,
1970.*

Recommendations for actions affecting the appointment, reappointment or
promotion of faculty members under the tenure system must be in accord
with the provisions of the tenure system.

At the level of the basic administrative unit, judgments on non-tenured
faculty with respect to professional competence (including teaching
ability), academic potential, and the needs of the department are made
by the responsible administrator after consultation with the tenured
faculty and/or other duly constituted group specified in the bylaws of
that basic administrative unit. Recommendations for reappointment or
promotion which do not involve the award of tenure are reviewed and must
be approved successively by the dean, the provost and the president, who
makes the final decision. Recommendations for reappointment or promotion
which involve the award of tenure are reviewed and must be approved
successively by the dean, the provost, and the president, who makes the
final recommendation to the Board of Trustees for action.

Each basic administrative unit shall base its judgments on criteria and
procedures that are clearly formulated, objective and relevant. These
criteria and procedures shall be known to all members of the basic
administrative unit. If appropriate, the responsible administrator may
supplement information required for these judgments by consulting with
representative non-tenured faculty, students and/or qualified
individuals outside the basic administrative unit. Review procedures
shall be described in its bylaws and shall include a means by which the
faculty member is evaluated and informed annually of his/her progress.
These bylaws shall provide for a designated group to make
recommendations with respect to reappointment, tenure, or promotion.
Procedures shall also exist by which the faculty member may confer with
this sub-group before a decision is made in his/her case.

Decision not to reappoint a non-tenured faculty member does not
necessarily imply that the faculty member has failed to meet the
standards of the University with respect to academic competence and/or
professional integrity. This decision may be contingent, wholly or in
part, upon the availability of salary funds and/or departmental needs.
The decision not to reappoint a non-tenured faculty member does not
require action by the Board of Trustees. In the case of a non-tenured
faculty member within the tenure system, notification is required as set
forth in the section entitled [Operating Principles of the Tenure
System](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/tenure_operation.html "Tenure Priniciples"),
above. Such decision is made at the level of the basic administrative
unit. Upon written request of the faculty member, the administrator of
the basic administrative unit making the decision shall transmit in
writing the reasons for the decision.

If a non-tenured faculty member believes that the decision not to
reappoint has been made in a manner which is at variance with the
established evaluation procedures, he/she may, following efforts to
reconcile the differences at the level of the basic administrative unit
and the Dean of his/her college, initiate an appeal in accordance with
the Faculty Grievance Policy.

When reason arises to consider dismissal of a non-tenured faculty member
before the expiration of his/her term of appointment, the procedures to
be followed shall be identical with those established for the dismissal
of a tenured faculty member.

\*See the statement on [Promotion of Tenured
Faculty](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/tenure_promotion.html "Tenure promotion").\
\
[Back to Faculty
Handbook](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/4Section-HR-Policies.html)
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/non-tenured_faculty.pcf)
