---
title: 'Post-Tenure Review'
---

::: {#body}
Faculty Handbook

**Post-Tenure Review**

 Last updated: 12/18/2002

**IV. ACADEMIC HUMAN RESOURCES  POLICIES *(Cont.)***

*This statement was issued by the Office of the Provost on December 18,
2002.*

Michigan State University has not adopted a distinct separate policy on
the review of faculty following the award of tenure.  Post-tenure review
is implemented through several existing policies and procedures
(contained in the Faculty Handbook), including a clarifying
interpretation by the University Committee on Faculty Tenure on the
meaning of the term \"incompetence\" in the disciplinary and dismissal
policy.  Performance is monitored through the use of annual written
performance evaluations as required by the policy on \"Faculty
Review.\"  Work performance, as determined in such reviews, is to be
reflected in annual merit salary adjustments and as a basis for advice
and suggestions for improvement.  Although not triggered by a fixed
number of years of low performance, discipline in a variety of forms may
be invoked under the \"Discipline and Dismissal of Tenured Faculty for
Cause\" policy.  In more serious cases, dismissal can be invoked under
the \"Discipline and Dismissal of Tenured Faculty for Cause\" policy. 
This procedure involves notice and a formal hearing involving review by
peers.  Interpretation of the term \"incompetence\" by the University
Committee on Faculty Tenure includes an expectation for professional
development support and review by peers before disciplinary or dismissal
action is contemplated.  More information is available on the history of
post-tenure review deliberations.\
\
[Back to Faculty
Handbook](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/4Section-HR-Policies.html)
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/post-tenure_review.pcf)
