---
title: Tenure Action and Promotion
---

::: {#body}
Faculty Handbook

**Tenure Action and Promotion**

**IV. ACADEMIC HUMAN RESOURCES POLICIES *(Cont.)***

Recommendations for actions under the tenure system and for promotions
in rank are made in the department according to unit, college and
university bylaws, policies and procedures.  Recommendations which do
not involve the award of tenure are reviewed successively by the dean,
the provost and the president, who makes the final decision.
Recommendations which involve the award of tenure are reviewed
successively by the dean, the provost, and the president, who makes the
final recommendation to the Board of Trustees for action. 
Department/school recommendations against reappointment or promotion of
a tenured faculty member are reviewed by the dean and provost.  Since
extensive information is needed to make an adequate evaluation of the
performance of each faculty member to be recommended for reappointment,
tenure, or promotion, a comprehensive form has been developed which
provides space for reporting activities such as
instruction\--undergraduate, graduate, non-credit instruction, and
academic advising; research and creative activities; service-within
scholarly and professional organizations, within the University, within
the broader community, e.g. MSU Extension, professional/patient care
activities, International Studies and Programs, Urban Affairs Programs;
other evidence of merit.  The expectations for each individual are
dependent on the individual\'s particular assignment and the missions of
the unit.\
\
[Back to Faculty
Handbook](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/4Section-HR-Policies.html)
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/tenure_action.pcf)
