---
title: Discipline and Dismissal of Tenured Faculty for Cause
---

::: {#body}
Faculty Handbook

**Discipline and Dismissal of Tenured Faculty for Cause**

 Last updated: 12/18/2015

**IV. ACADEMIC HUMAN RESOURCES POLICIES *(Cont.)***

*The following policy was approved by the Board of Trustees on March 16,
1967 and revised on May 5, 2006 and December 18, 2015.*

 **Preamble**

The University's commitment "to promote the welfare of mankind through
teaching, research, and public service" is furthered by the intellectual
integrity and professional honesty of faculty members mindful of their
rights and responsibilities. Essential to sustaining an environment of
mutual trust and respect is the need for impartial investigation of
alleged violations of policies related to faculty conduct; due process;
and, when necessary, disciplinary action up to and including dismissal
for cause. Discipline, dismissal, or the threat of either action, may
not be used to restrain faculty members in their exercise of academic
freedom.

**I.   CONFIDENTIALITY**

All proceedings and records with regard to disciplinary action or
dismissal for cause proceedings shall be kept confidential to the degree
permitted by the law. The Board of Trustees will decide on a case by
case basis whether action taken by the Board pursuant to the dismissal
portion of this Policy will identify the affected faculty member by
name.** \
\
II.   MAILING OF NOTICES UNDER THIS POLICY**

In matters involving minor discipline, notices required by this Policy
will be sent to the faculty member by email to the faculty member's
msu.edu account, with a courtesy copy sent to the faculty member by
first class mail to the address of record. It is the faculty member's
responsibility to regularly review the msu.edu email account for
departmental and other University communications. \
\
In matters involving serious discipline or dismissal, the faculty member
shall be sent the notices required by this Policy by certified mail to
his/her address of record filed with the University. However, if
delivery by certified mail is not possible or if the faculty member
refuses or waives delivery of certified mail, mailing notices to the
faculty member at his/her address of record by first class mail will be
considered sufficient. An email will also be sent to the faculty
member's University email address notifying him/her of the fact that a
notice required by this Policy has been sent by one of the methods
described above.** \
**

**III.   PARTICIPATION OF ADVISORS, OBSERVERS, OR COUNSEL**

Faculty members are entitled to bring an advisor or observer to any
meeting regarding disciplinary action referenced in this policy. The
advisor or observer must be a member of the University community
(faculty, staff, or administrator), including *emeriti*. The advisor or
observer may be present during the meeting, but will have no voice or
formal role in the meeting. Unless otherwise specified in this Policy,
faculty members are entitled to bring an advisor of their choice,
including legal counsel, to any meeting or hearing conducted during
dismissal for cause proceedings.  During those proceedings, the advisor
has voice and is granted full participation. \
**\
IV.   GROUNDS FOR DISCIPLINE AND DISMISSAL** ^1^

A faculty member^2 ^may be disciplined, or dismissed, for cause on
grounds including but not limited to (1) intellectual dishonesty; (2)
acts of discrimination, including harassment, prohibited by law or
University policy; (3) acts of moral turpitude substantially related to
the fitness of faculty members to engage in teaching, research,
service/outreach and/or administration; (4) theft or misuse of
University property; (5) incompetence;^3 ^(6) refusal to perform
reasonable assigned duties; (7) use of professional authority to exploit
others; (8) violation of University policy substantially related to
performance of faculty responsibilities; and (9) violation of law(s)
substantially related to the fitness of faculty members to engage in
teaching, research, service/outreach and/or administration.^4[\
](https://hr.msu.edu/documents/facacadhandbooks/facultyhandbook/dismissal.htm#Footnote4)^

**V.   TYPES OF DISCIPLINE**

Disciplinary action is normally iterative and falls into two general
categories: minor discipline and serious discipline. *Minor
discipline* includes but is not limited to: verbal reprimand, written
reprimand, mandatory training, foregoing salary increase, restitution,
monitoring of behavior and performance, and/or reassignment of
duties; *Serious discipline* includes suspension with or without pay or
temporary or permanent reduction in appointment.  A full suspension
without pay may not exceed six months. In egregious cases of wrongdoing,
or where attempts at discipline have not successfully remedied
performance concerns, a faculty member may be *Dismissed* for cause.\
\
In matters where the Dean^5 ^and the Office of the Associate
Provost^6 ^concur that a faculty member's continued performance of
faculty duties poses a significant risk of harm to persons or property,
the faculty member may be relieved of duties and suspended with pay
during the pendency of the review panel process.\
\
In all faculty discipline, the University bears the burden of proof that
adequate cause exists; it will be satisfied only by clear and convincing
evidence unless a different standard is required by law.^7 ^The faculty
member's record should be considered as a whole when contemplating
imposition of disciplinary action. \
\
In cases of both minor and serious discipline (1) faculty members retain
the right to grieve disciplinary actions that have been implemented
under the regular terms of the Faculty Grievance Procedure and (2) the
faculty member may submit a letter of exception to the imposition of
discipline, disputing the grounds for the unit administrator's decision,
to be included in the faculty member's personnel file.** \
\
VI.   PROCESS TO INITIATE MINOR OR SERIOUS DISCIPLINE**

**A. MINOR DISCIPLINE**

Where the unit administrator seeks to impose minor disciplinary action,
the unit administrator shall first meet with the faculty member to
discuss the administrator's concern and the potential for discipline.
The administrator will notify the faculty member during that meeting of
the right and opportunity to request a consultation with the
department/school faculty advisory committee, its chair, or the chair of
the UCFA personnel subcommittee^8 ^before the administrator proceeds
with any disciplinary action. The purpose of such informal consultation
is to reconcile disputes early and informally, when that is appropriate,
by clarifying the issues involved, resolving misunderstandings,
considering alternatives, and noting applicable bylaws.\
\
The unit administrator and faculty member, if requested by the faculty
member, will consult with the department/school faculty advisory
committee, its chair, or with the chair of the UCFA personnel
subcommittee in a prompt fashion to discuss the administrator's concern
and the potential for discipline. \
\
Should the unit administrator still wish to proceed with disciplinary
action after that consultation, the administrator must consult with the
Dean and the Office of the Associate Provost to discuss the proposed
disciplinary action. If the proposed discipline is authorized by those
offices, the unit administrator shall provide the faculty member with
written notice of the cause for disciplinary action in sufficient detail
for the faculty member to address the specifics of the charges, and an
opportunity to respond in writing prior to the imposition of any
disciplinary action, within seven (7) days^9 ^of receipt of the unit
administrator's written notice. The written response, if any, will be
provided to the Dean and the Office of the Associate Provost for further
comment.\
\
The unit administrator, in consideration of the written response and
further comments, if any, shall make a decision regarding the
disciplinary action and notify the faculty member in writing. The
discipline will then take effect.** \
**

**B. SERIOUS DISCIPLINE**

Where the unit administrator seeks to impose serious disciplinary
action, the unit administrator shall first meet with the faculty member
to discuss the administrator's concern and the potential for discipline.
Because it is in the interest of the University, the unit, and the
faculty member that attempts be made to resolve serious disciplinary
issues early and informally, the unit administrator and faculty member
are encouraged to meet with the chair of University Committee on Faculty
Affairs (UCFA)^10 ^to discuss the matter.  \
\
If that meeting does not resolve the issue, the unit administrator shall
consult with the Dean and the Office of the Associate Provost to discuss
the proposed disciplinary action. If the proposed discipline is
authorized by those offices, the unit administrator shall provide the
faculty member with written notice of the proposed disciplinary action
in sufficient detail for the faculty member to address the specifics of
the charges.\
\
The faculty member shall have seven (7) days after receiving the notice
of proposed disciplinary action to (1) file a written statement with the
unit administrator regarding the proposed discipline,^11 ^or (2) request
a meeting with a disciplinary review panel of the UCFA.  A request to
meet with the review panel should be made to the unit administrator, who
will forward it promptly to the Chair of the UCFA. If the faculty member
does not submit a written response or request a meeting with the
disciplinary review panel within the seven-day period, the discipline
will take effect.  ** \
**

**1.   Review Panel Selection and Composition**

The Chair of the UCFA, in consultation with the Office of the Provost,
shall annually establish a three-person review panel made up of current
members of the UCFA to meet with unit administrators and faculty members
regarding potential serious disciplinary action. The members of the
review panel will serve until their replacements are selected the
following academic year.  A list of three alternates will also be
maintained in the event that a panel member is unavailable. The Office
of the Provost will arrange training about academic personnel actions
and policies for the review panel and alternates.

**2.   Meeting with the Review Panel**

Upon receipt of a request to meet, the Chair of the UCFA will schedule a
meeting with the unit administrator, faculty member, and disciplinary
review panel. That meeting will take place no later than the second
regularly scheduled meeting after the request is received, but not to
exceed 21 days during those periods when the UCFA is not regularly
meeting. Except in unusual circumstances, meetings of the disciplinary
review panel will take place before, during, or after the regularly
scheduled meeting time of the UCFA and both the unit administrator and
the faculty member will be expected to adjust their schedules to attend
the meeting. If either party cannot personally attend for good cause, as
determined by the Chair of UCFA, that individual may participate through
alternate communication methods (e.g., telephone, video conference) or
send a representative to the meeting.

No member of the review panel shall participate in a meeting involving a
faculty member from the same college in which the panel member is
appointed. The faculty member may also request that any member of the
panel recuse himself/herself if a conflict of interest exists. If the
panel member refuses to recuse himself/herself, the Chair of the UCFA
will determine whether, in light of the challenged person's knowledge of
the case or personal or professional relationships with a party, the
challenged person would be able to fairly and impartially participate in
the meeting and make a fair and impartial recommendation.

**3.   Recommendation of the Review Panel**

Following its meeting, the review panel will provide its recommendation
to the unit administrator, with a copy to the faculty member, within
seven (7) days about whether the proposed serious discipline should be
imposed, lesser discipline should be substituted, or no discipline
should be imposed.  The recommendation is not binding on the unit
administrator but shall be given all due consideration. If the unit
administrator does not take the advice of the review panel, he/she will
provide a detailed reply to its recommendation for consideration and
possible amendment by the panel within seven (7) days, copying the
faculty member. If the panel decides to amend its original
recommendation, it must do so within seven (7) days, copying the faculty
member. This documentation will form a part of the permanent record of
the discipline process.

**4.   Imposition of Disciplinary Action**

After receiving the response (and amendment, if any), the unit
administrator shall make a decision regarding the disciplinary action
and notify the faculty member in writing. If the review panel
recommended against imposition of serious discipline, or recommended
lesser discipline, the unit administrator must meet with the Dean and
the Office of the Associate Provost before proceeding with disciplinary
action. 

**VII.   DISMISSAL FOR CAUSE PROCESS**

**A.   INFORMAL RESOLUTION/PRELIMINARY CONFERENCE STAGE**

**1.   Dismissal for Cause Review Officer\'s Recommendation**

A Dean ("charging party") proposing to initiate dismissal for cause
proceedings against a faculty member must file a written request with
the Provost that provides the reasons for considering dismissal in
sufficient detail for the faculty member to address the specifics of the
charges, if necessary, and provides copies of all relevant
documentation, including copies of any past disciplinary action or
warnings to the faculty member that his/her conduct might lead to
dismissal.    \
\
Upon receipt of such a request, the Provost shall notify the faculty
member of the request and ask the Dismissal for Cause Review Officer
(see Appendix III) to review the matter and to provide a confidential
report and recommendation to the Provost as to whether dismissal for
cause proceedings should be initiated. \
\
The review process is intended to provide an opportunity for informal
resolution of the matter. Accordingly, meetings between the faculty
member and the Review Officer and between the faculty member and the
Provost during the review process are informal, confidential, and will
proceed without counsel present.^12 ^At any stage during the review
process, the faculty member may elect to forgo meeting or talking with
the Review Officer or the Provost. \
\
The Review Officer shall review the reasons for considering dismissal
and the evidence in support of dismissal with the charging party. The
Review Officer shall also talk with the charging party, faculty member,
and the faculty member's department chair or school director, prior to
making a recommendation to the Provost.   \
\
In reaching his/her recommendation, the Review Officer should consider
what steps have been taken to achieve informal resolution of the matter;
whether, in cases involving a pattern of conduct, the faculty member had
any warning that the conduct might lead to dismissal; and whether any
measures might be taken to resolve the matter short of instituting
dismissal for cause proceedings. The Review Officer's report and
recommendation should be forwarded to the Provost within thirty (30)
days of the Review Officer's selection by the President, unless an
extension of time is approved by the Provost.

**2.   Determination by the Provost**

The Provost shall review the report and recommendation of the Review
Officer and determine whether the matter is of sufficient seriousness to
warrant the initiation of dismissal for cause proceedings.^13 ^In
reaching his/her decision, the Provost may discuss the matter with the
Review Officer, charging party, and/or faculty member.  The confidential
report and recommendation of the Review Officer is advisory to the
Provost^14 ^and shall not be available to either party or become part of
the record if dismissal for cause proceedings are instituted. 

**3.   Conference with the Faculty Member**

If the Provost determines that dismissal for cause proceedings are
warranted, he/she shall notify the faculty member and the charging party
(the "parties") of that decision in writing, providing a copy of all
documentation provided by the dean to the Review Officer, and offer the
faculty member an opportunity for a personal meeting. No formal charges
shall be filed until 30 days after this notification, unless an
extension of time is approved by the Provost. The matter may be resolved
informally during this time, including by the faculty member's
resignation.  If the faculty member is not available for a personal
meeting during the 30-day period, the Provost may communicate with the
faculty member electronically or by correspondence that provides the
faculty member with a reasonable opportunity to confer informally with
the Provost.

**B.   INITIATION OF FORMAL PROCEEDINGS**

If the Provost determines that the matter is serious enough to warrant
initiation of dismissal for cause proceedings, the Provost shall provide
written notice of that determination to the President, along with a
recommendation as to whether the faculty member should be relieved from
some or all of his/her duties during the dismissal for cause
proceedings.  The parties should receive a copy of this notice. If the
President decides to relieve the faculty member from all of his/her
duties, the faculty member shall be placed on a leave of absence with
pay during the pendency of the dismissal for cause proceedings. \
\
Following written notification by the Provost to the President, the
charging party may initiate dismissal for cause proceedings against a
faculty member by filing written charges with the President and Chair of
the University Committee on Faculty Tenure (UCFT). The charges must
contain: (1) the allegations; (2) the names of the witnesses, insofar as
then known, who will testify in support of the allegations; and (3) the
nature of the testimony likely to be presented by each of these
witnesses. \
\
The Chair of the UCFT shall promptly send a copy of the written charges
to the faculty member.  

**1.   Meetings between the Presiding Officer and the Parties**

As soon as practicable following the filing of formal charges, the Chair
of the UCFT shall meet with the parties. The purposes of such meetings
include:\
\

a.    Challenges to any members of the Hearing Committee for conflict of
interest (see Appendix I).

b.    Exchange of documents and witness lists between the parties.

c.    Stipulations by the parties on any relevant matters of fact. Any
stipulation shall be reduced to writing and signed by both parties and
the Presiding Officer.

d.    Rulings by the Presiding Officer on any proposed revisions to the
charges that might be offered or requested. 

\
The Chair of the UCFT may ask legal counsel to attend these meetings.
The Chair of the UCFT shall arrange that recordings of these meetings
are made and included in the complete case record. These meetings will
take place during regularly scheduled meeting times for the UCFT and the
relevant administrator and faculty member will be expected to adjust
their schedules to attend.

**2.    The Hearing**

1.  1.  Service on the Hearing Committee shall be a high priority
        University responsibility for the duration of the hearing. 
        Accordingly, administrators of units shall take all reasonable
        measures to reduce the Hearing Committee members' other
        responsibilities. Unit administrators are encouraged to provide
        additional support (such as graders and graduate assistants) to
        Hearing Committee members for the duration of their service. \
        \
    2.  The Secretary for Academic Governance shall make available to
        the Chair of the Hearing Committee any necessary secretarial and
        clerical assistance. \
        \
    3.  Legal counsel to the Hearing Committee shall arrange for a full
        stenographic record to be made of the hearing. If any party
        requests additional copies of the record or an expedited copy of
        the record, the additional costs of that request shall be paid
        by the requesting party.
    4.  The Chair of the Hearing Committee shall request the presence of
        any witness or the delivery of any University document germane
        to the hearing. University administrators are expected to
        cooperate with such requests.\
        \
    5.  The Chair of the Hearing Committee shall schedule the hearing
        within a reasonable time (usually not to exceed 21 days) after
        the faculty member is provided notice of the charges against
        him/her, due consideration being given to the faculty member's
        opportunity for the preparation of a defense. \
        \
    6.  The hearing shall be closed, except that the Hearing Committee
        may consider a request from the faculty member to open the
        hearing. If such a request is made, the Hearing Committee shall
        hear the views of both parties on the question and shall
        determine whether the hearing sessions are to be open or closed.
        Regardless of the faculty member's request, the Chair of the
        Hearing Committee may, in the interest of orderly and equitable
        proceedings, rule that a given session or portion of a session
        be closed.  Sessions or portions of sessions that will involve
        student testimony or testimony that includes personally
        identifiable student information must be closed. Sessions that
        will involve non-student witness testimony may also be closed at
        the discretion of the Chair of the Hearing Committee.\
        \
    7.  The Chair of the Hearing Committee shall conduct the hearing in
        accordance with the procedures stipulated in Appendix II. \
        \
    8.  The charging party or his/her representative shall be present at
        all sessions of the Hearing Committee at which evidence is
        presented or arguments are heard, and may (1) present
        evidence, (2) call, examine, and cross-examine witnesses,
        and (3) examine all documentary evidence received by the Hearing
        Committee.  The charging party's advisor or legal counsel (if
        any) may also be present at the request of the charging party.\
        \
    9.  The faculty member and/or his/her representative may be present
        at all sessions of the Hearing Committee at which evidence is
        presented or arguments are heard, and may (1) present
        evidence, (2) call, examine, and cross-examine witnesses,
        and (3) examine all documentary evidence received by the Hearing
        Committee. The faculty member's advisor or legal counsel (if
        any) may also be present at the request of the faculty member.
        If the faculty member cannot be present at a hearing session due
        to circumstances beyond the faculty member's control, the Chair
        may grant permission for the faculty member to participate
        through alternate communication methods, reschedule the hearing
        session, or choose to conduct the hearing session in the absence
        of the faculty member. \
        \
    10. If the faculty member chooses not to be present, the Chair shall
        conduct the hearing sessions in the absence of the faculty
        member.  \
        \
    11. The Provost (or his/her designee) shall be available to the
        Hearing Committee to provide guidance on policy or procedural
        questions. In the event that a policy or procedural question is
        at issue in the dismissal for cause proceedings, the Provost may
        choose to file a position statement with the Hearing Committee
        regarding the policy or procedural issue. In those cases, the
        Provost (or his/her designee) will not serve in an advisory
        capacity to the Hearing Committee regarding policy or procedural
        questions.  \
        \
    12. Except as provided below, only those members of the Hearing
        Committee who have been present at all sessions in which
        evidence has been presented or arguments have been heard shall
        have the right to vote. An exception to this attendance
        requirement shall be made by the Chair of the Hearing Committee
        for a member who has missed, for good cause, no more than one
        session and who has informed the Chair in writing that he/she
        has read the official transcript of that session. This
        attendance requirement may also be waived by unanimous consent
        of the parties.\
        \
    13. Within a reasonable time following final arguments (usually not
        to exceed 14 days), the members of the Hearing Committee will
        vote to determine whether cause has been established.  If they
        determine that cause has been established, they shall recommend
        either dismissal or other disciplinary action(s). If a majority
        of the Hearing Committee determines that cause has not been
        established, the matter is closed.  

**3.   Processing the Record and Rendering Judgment**

a.    Hearing Committee Report.

1.    Within 30 days following the final arguments, the Hearing
Committee shall submit its written report to the parties. If additional
time is needed, the Chair of the Hearing Committee shall request an
extension of time from the Chair of the UCFT. \
\
2.    The Hearing Committee report must include an explanation of its
determination as to whether cause has been established. If the Hearing
Committee determines that cause has been established, the report must
also include an explanation of its recommendation for either dismissal
or some other disciplinary action(s). A report which recommends
dismissal for cause or other discipline must state that at least one of
the charges made against the faculty member has been proven by clear and
convincing evidence. \
\
3.    Subject to subsection 4 below, all members of the Hearing
Committee shall sign the report attesting that they have read it and
that it constitutes the findings and recommendations of a majority of
the Hearing Committee. \
\
4.    Any member(s) of the Hearing Committee may file and sign a
minority report, which shall become part of the Hearing Committee
report.

b.   Appeals.

1.    Grounds for appeal are limited to whether the Hearing Committee
committed a prejudicial violation of the required procedures (see
Appendix II) during the hearing process.\
\
2.    Either party may appeal the decision of the Hearing Committee to
the then-current members of the UCFT, excluding the Presiding Officer
and any members of the UCFT who served on the Hearing Committee. The
remaining UCFT members shall constitute an appellate body ("the Appeal
Panel") and shall select a Chair by majority vote. \
\
3.    A party wishing to appeal ("appellant") must submit a written
appeal to the Chair of UCFT within 15 days after the date that the
Hearing Committee report was mailed.  The Chair of UCFT will transmit
the appeal and a copy of the Hearing Committee report to the Appeal
Panel and the appellee.^15 ^\
\
4.    The appeal must be in writing and must specify the claimed
procedural violation(s) on which the appeal is based. \
\
5.    The appellee may submit a written response to the appeal.The
response must be sent to the Chair of the UCFT and the party who
initiated the appeal no later than 15 days after the date the appeal was
mailed to the appellee. \
\
6.    The Appeal Panel will convene to decide the appeal. The Appeal
Panel will usually decide the appeal based on the written materials
presented and in the absence of the parties. If necessary, the Appeal
Panel may request that both parties present oral argument and/or respond
to questions regarding the appeal. The Appeal Panel may impose
reasonable limits on the time allotted for oral arguments. \
\
7.    The Appeal Panel shall render a decision on the appeal within ten
days of receiving all arguments. A decision will be made by a simple
majority vote.  In rendering a decision, the Appeal Panel may not amend
the findings or the recommendations of the Hearing Committee. The Appeal
Panel may reach one of the following determinations:

i.    No violation found. The Hearing Committee did not commit a
prejudicial violation of the required procedures during the hearing
process.\
\
ii.    Harmless Error. Although a violation of the procedures occurred,
it did not materially harm the appellant's ability to present his/her
case fully.\
\
iii.    Rehearing. The Hearing Committee committed a prejudicial
violation of the procedures during the hearing process which can and
should be corrected by the original Hearing Committee.\
\
iv.    Rehearing/New Hearing Committee. The Hearing Committee committed
a prejudicial violation of the procedures during the hearing process
which has tainted the hearing to an extent that correction by the
original Hearing Committee is impossible. A new Hearing Committee must
be established to rehear the case.

c.**    **Final Hearing Committee Report.

1.    After appeals and rehearings, if any, are concluded, the Hearing
Committee's report shall be considered final and shall be sent to the
President, the Provost, and the parties. \
\
2.    A copy of the complete transcript of the hearing shall be sent to
the faculty member. \
\
3.    The Chair of the Hearing Committee shall file the complete record
of the case with the Office of the Provost.  The complete record shall
contain: (i) the final Hearing Committee report, (ii) any Appeal Panel
decision, (iii) meeting minutes, (iv) the record required by part 11 of
Appendix I, and (v) the transcript of the hearing. The complete record
shall be held for review in the Provost's Office and shall be available
to the President, the Provost, the Board of Trustees, and the parties,
for their review, in a place designated by the Provost. \
\
4.    If the Hearing Committee finds cause, the Provost and the parties
may, within 15 days of the date of the mailing of the Hearing
Committee's report, review the record and file written comments with the
Chair of the Hearing Committee and the President.^16 ^ 

d.    The President, within 15 days of the date of receipt, unless an
extension of time has been granted by the Chair of the Hearing
Committee, will review the Hearing Committee's report and provide
his/her preliminary response in writing, accompanied by supporting
rationale, to the Chair of the Hearing Committee, the Provost, and the
parties. \
\
e.    The Provost, the parties, and the Hearing Committee, through its
Chair, may, within 15 days of the date that the President's preliminary
response was mailed, submit written comments to the President about
his/her preliminary response.  \
\
f.    Following the 15 day period for submitting written responses, the
President will, within 15 days, issue a final report on the charges
against the faculty member. Copies of the President's final report will
be provided to the Chair of the Hearing Committee, the Provost, and the
parties. If the Hearing Committee and the President both determine that
there is cause for disciplinary action but not dismissal, the
President's final report will conclude the matter and the disciplinary
action recommended by the President will be imposed.^17 ^   \
\
g.    If either the Hearing Committee (by majority vote) or the
President recommends dismissal, the President shall submit the following
materials to the Board of Trustees: the final Hearing Committee report
(along with any written comments), the preliminary response of the
President, and the final report of the President. Any Trustee may have
access to the complete record of the case.\
\
h.    The Office of the Provost shall provide notice to the parties of
the date and time that the Board of Trustees is expected to take action
on the matter. \
\
i.    After reviewing the relevant materials, the Board of Trustees may:
(1) dismiss the faculty member for cause, (2) impose discipline other
than dismissal, or (3) determine that cause has not been established and
close the matter. \
\

[**Appendices**  **I, II, III**
](/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/tenure_discipline_appendices1-3.html)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

::: {xmlns=""}
**Footnote:**
:::

 **^1 ^** Limitations of this Policy: (1) A faculty member who fails to
return to the University within a reasonable time after a term break,
sabbatical, or other leave of absence shall forfeit rights to further
employment and shall be considered as having resigned; in such cases,
the faculty Leaves of Absence policy shall be followed. (2) A
tenure-system faculty member's material misrepresentation made to the
University in obtaining employment shall be addressed by the Policy and
Procedure for Rescission.

**^2 ^** This Policy also applies to the discipline and dismissal of
untenured faculty appointed in the tenure system prior to the expiration
of the term of appointment.

**^3 ^** The term "incompetence" refers to professional incompetence, as
defined in the Interpretation of the Term "Incompetence" by the
University Committee on Faculty Tenure.

**^4 ^** This would include violations of criminal or civil (e.g.,
anti-harassment or discrimination) laws that have a nexus with the
faculty member's professional responsibilities.

 **^5 ^** For purposes of this Policy, "Dean" refers to separately
reporting Directors as well.

**^6 ^** For purposes of this Policy, "Associate Provost" refers to the
Associate Provost and Associate Vice President for Academic Human
Resources.

**^7 ^** "Clear and convincing" means the standard of proof that is
beyond a mere preponderance (i.e. more probable than not) but below that
of "beyond a reasonable doubt." The "clear and convincing" standard
would be met when those making the determination have a firm belief that
the facts in issue have been established.

**^8 ^** If the chair is not tenured, the chair may request that a
tenured member of the personnel subcommittee fill this role.

**^9 ^** Unless otherwise noted, references to "days" in this Policy
refer to calendar days.

**^10 ^** If the chair is not tenured, a tenured member of UCFA may fill
this role at the request of the chair, the unit administrator, or the
faculty member.

**^11 ^** The unit administrator shall consider the written statement of
the faculty member and confer with the Dean and the Office of the
Associate Provost, after providing copies of the faculty member's
statement to both, before proceeding with disciplinary action.

**^12 ^** The faculty member retains the right to have an observer
present.

^\ **13** ^ The decision of the Provost as to whether the matter is
serious enough to warrant initiation of dismissal for cause proceedings
is not a determination regarding the merits of the charges against the
faculty member and shall not be viewed as the Provost's agreement or
disagreement with the charges against the faculty member.

** ^14^ ** The Provost shall not comment on any information contained in
the confidential report of the Review Officer at any stage of the
dismissal for cause proceedings unless that information is also
contained in the record of those proceedings. The report will be
maintained confidentially to the maximum extent permitted by law.

^\ **15** ^ The "appellee" is the party of the original dispute who did
not file the appeal.

**^16 ^** When provided an opportunity to comment, the Provost and
parties are expected to confine their comments to the record and not
introduce new information.  However, the Provost may comment on
procedural or policy issues at any time.

 **^17^ ** Disciplinary action implemented under this Policy may not be
challenged through the Faculty Grievance Procedure.

[**Appendices**  **I, II, III\
**](/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/tenure_discipline_appendices1-3.html)

**[User\'s Guide: Discipline and Dismissal of Tenured Faculty for Cuase
Policy](/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/documents/user-guide-discipline-dismissal-for-cause.pdf "User's Guide: Discipline and Dismissal of Tenured Faculty for Cause Policy")
[\
\
](/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/tenure_discipline_appendices1-3.html)**
**[Back to Faculty
Handbook](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/4Section-HR-Policies.html)\
**
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/tenure_discipline_dismissal.pcf)
