---
title: University Distinguished Professor
---

::: {#body}
Faculty Handbook

**University Distinguished Professor**

 Last updated: 6/6/1989

**IV. ACADEMIC HUMAN RESOURCES POLICIES *(Cont.)***

*The following statement was approved by the Board of Trustees on June
6, 1989.*

The title, University Distinguished Professor, will be conferred on
selected members of the Michigan State University faculty to recognize
distinguished achievement in teaching, research and public
service.** ^1 ^** A University Distinguished Professorship will be held
for the remainder of the recipient\'s active service at Michigan State
University; the title University Distinguished Professor Emeritus will
be conferred upon retirement. Individuals holding a University
Distinguished Professorship will receive, in addition to salary, an
average stipend of five thousand dollars for five years to support
professional activities. Assignments for University Distinguished
Professors will be arranged with the dean, chairperson/director and the
Provost. The designation will be highly honorific and consequently very
exclusive. Membership in this category will reflect the diverse
scholarly dimensions of Michigan State University.

**Criteria for Selecting University Distinguished Professors**

In general, University Distinguished Professors will have been
recognized nationally and usually internationally for the importance of
their scholarly achievements. They will also have demonstrated the
breadth of interest characteristically encompassed by the traditional
role of professor as teacher and public servant. In addition, they will
have brought distinction to Michigan State University as a result of
their activities.

Specifically, a University Distinguished Professor will have achieved a
record judged by peers to be superior and outstanding in preferably all
but in at least two of the following areas: superior teaching skills of
recognized breadth and depth in their discipline; scholarly, creative,
and artistic achievements; and a distinguished record of public service
exemplified by the application of scholarship and/or creative and
artistic endeavors in addressing the needs of one or more external
publics.

University Distinguished Professors will have already achieved an
outstanding record comparable to that of scholars awarded named
professorships at MSU and elsewhere. That record will have been
recognized by the University at previous opportunities where merit is
rewarded\--such as salary increases.

University Distinguished Professorships will be conferred on members of
the Michigan State University faculty whose achievement has already been
recognized by the University with the rank of full professor; the title
is not to be used for recruiting outsiders.

**Selection Process**

University Distinguished Professorships will be awarded by the Board of
Trustees upon recommendation of the Provost and President. A committee
of faculty and deans will advise these officers.

::: {xmlns=""}
1.  From time to time the Provost will request nominations for
    University Distinguished Professorships from members of the faculty,
    deans, directors, and chairpersons.
2.  Written nominations, submitted to the Provost, will include:
    1.  A cover letter making or supporting the nomination and providing
        a brief summary of the candidate\'s achievements;
    2.  The candidate\'s **curriculum vitae**;
    3.  Letters of endorsement from relevant deans and chairpersons or
        directors. These administrators will consult with appropriate
        department, school or college advisory committees before
        endorsing nominations.
    4.  Letters of support from faculty and other colleagues at this and
        especially other institutions, assessing the candidate\'s record
        of achievements in teaching, research, or public service;
    5.  Letters of support from present and former students will be
        encouraged when appropriate.
3.  A standing advisory committee composed of four faculty members and
    three deans, appointed by the Provost and serving four-year terms on
    a staggered basis, will review nominations and make recommendations
    to the Provost for transmittal to the President. Nominations for
    committee members will be obtained from both the University
    Committee on Academic Governance and the Council of Deans. Committee
    members must be tenured professors who themselves have outstanding
    records of teaching, research, and/or public service and are
    committed to the multi-dimensional concept of excellence valued by
    Michigan State University. The selection of the committee\'s
    membership must ensure the inclusion of women and minorities.
:::

------------------------------------------------------------------------

::: {xmlns=""}
**Footnote:**
:::

**^[]{#Footnote1}1^ **It is expected that in time, as a result of
Development Fund efforts, endowment support will be obtained for many
University Distinguished Professorships resulting in the addition of a
name to the title.

Additional information can be found
at <http://www.ahr.msu.edu/all-university-awards>.\
\
[Back to Faculty
Handbook](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/4Section-HR-Policies.html)
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/university_distinguished_professor.pcf)
