---
title: 'William J. Beal Outstanding Faculty Award'
---

::: {#body}
Faculty Handbook

**William J. Beal Outstanding Faculty Award**

::: {xmlns=""}
**IV. ACADEMIC HUMAN RESOURCES  POLICIES *(Cont.)*** ^1^
:::

William J. Beal Outstanding Faculty Awards (formerly the Distinguished
Faculty Awards) are made each year to members of the regular faculty,
i.e. tenure system faculty and librarians in the continuing appointment
system, for outstanding total service to the University. MSU College of
Law tenure system faculty, Facility for Rare Isotope Beams/National
Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory (FRIB/NSCL) faculty and Health
Programs (HP) faculty are also eligible for nomination. Each college
making nominations for the award has its own detailed criteria and
methods for nomination. The nominations are based on teaching; advising;
research; publications; art exhibitions; concert performances; committee
work; public service including extension, outreach and work with
government agencies and industry; or a combination of these activities.
Administrative excellence and length of service may not be used as the
sole criteria for nomination. However, nominees usually have at least
five years of service at Michigan State University.

Final selection of William J. Beal Outstanding Faculty Award winners
will be made by an All-University Awards Committee appointed by the
President. The Awards Committee each year will define and publish
selection criteria and solicit nominations.  Each nominating unit having
200 or more faculty members may nominate four candidates each year. Each
nominating unit having 100-199 faculty members may nominate three
candidates each year. Each nominating unit having fewer than 100 members
may nominate two candidates each year.  In addition to the collegiate
nominations, a current Michigan State University faculty member who
received the Distinguished Faculty Award (1988-2013)  or William J. Beal
Outstanding Faculty Award (2014 and thereafter) may make one nomination
annually directly to the Awards Committee.  The departments, schools and
colleges in which such nominees are appointed have the opportunity to
make comments - in addition to the regular supporting materials - on
such candidates, if they choose.  After nomination for the award by the
nominating units, or previous award recipient, screening will be carried
out at the direction of the Awards Committee, through subcommittees or
other means which they judge appropriate. The All-University Awards
Committee will consider the mix of candidates\' assigned duties over
time in making its evaluation. No more than ten William J. Beal
Outstanding Faculty Awards shall be made each year.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

::: {xmlns=""}
**Footnote:**
:::

**^1^ **Detailed nomination information is available from the Office of
the Provost or on the web
at <http://www.ahr.msu.edu/all-university-awards>.\
\
[Back to Faculty
Handbook](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/4Section-HR-Policies.html)
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/WJBealAward.pcf)
