---
title: '2.1 Academic Governance'
---

::: {#body}
Academic Specialist Manual

**2.1 Academic Governance**

::: {xmlns=""}
The academic specialist may participate in a governance structure as set
forth below:\
\
An Academic Specialist Advisory Committee shall be established to
provide a governance structure for the academic specialist community.
The Committee shall advise the Associate Provost and Associate Vice
President for Academic Human Resources on matters relating to the
Academic Specialist Appointment System and other relevant issues of
mutual concern. The Committee shall meet at least once a semester and
more frequently at the call of the Committee chairperson, a simple
majority of the Committee or the Associate Provost and Associate Vice
President for Academic Human Resources. 
:::

::: {xmlns=""}
:::

::: {xmlns=""}
The Committee shall be composed of up to fourteen members, with
representatives from each of the functional areas (research, outreach,
teaching, advising, curriculum development); one Committee position will
be elected from academic specialists who hold fixed term appointments.
Additionally, up to three academic specialists will be appointed by the
Associate Provost and Associate Vice President for Academic Human
Resources, in consultation with the Advisory Committee, to provide
diversity and balance. The Associate Provost and Associate Vice
President for Academic Human Resources and his/her staff member(s) shall
be ex officio members of the Advisory Committee. The Advisory
Committee\'s composition shall ensure that at any one time academic
specialists with assignments of teaching, advising, curriculum
development, research, public service/outreach and appointment on a
fixed term basis are represented on the Committee.
:::

The distribution of elected positions on the Academic Specialist
Advisory Committee among the functional areas reflects the current
distribution of academic specialist appointments; at six year intervals,
a review will be made of the pattern of academic specialist appointments
to accommodate any changes in the distribution of academic specialists
among the various functional areas.

Nominations and elections shall be administered during the Spring
semester by the Office of the Secretary for Academic Governance, in
consultation with the Office of the Associate Provost and Associate Vice
President for Academic Human Resources. Advisory Committee members shall
serve three-year terms on a staggered basis; appointed Committee members
serve a one-year term. A limit of two consecutive three-year elected
terms shall apply; an individual may only serve six consecutive one-year
appointed terms. All academic specialists with continuing, probationary
and fixed term appointment status as of January 1 of the year of the
election are eligible to be nominated and to vote in advisory committee
elections.

The Bylaws of the Academic Specialist Advisory Committee provide
additional detailed information about Committee membership and
nomination and election procedures. Copies of the bylaws are available
from the Associate Provost and Associate Vice President for Academic
Human Resources.

Finally, the University strongly recommends that the academic specialist
be extended governance enfranchisement at the college and other
administrative unit levels by individual units pursuant to the [Bylaws
for Academic
Governance](https://www.msu.edu/~acadgov/agbylaws.pdf "Bylaws Academic Governance").\
\
[Back to Academic Specialist
Handbook](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/academic-specialist-handbook/index.html)
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/academic-specialist-handbook/academic_governance.pcf)
