---
title: 'Appendix C. Board of Trustees Summary'
---

::: {#body}
Academic Specialist Manual

**Appendix C. Board of Trustees Summary**

::: {xmlns=""}
*(Note: This section is an abstract of the complete document and will
serve as the section to be included in the Faculty Handbook.)*
:::

**Academic Specialist Appointment System**

The Provost of Michigan State University, in recognition of the
essential contributions of specialists to academic programs, appoints,
upon recommendation of the appropriate department chairperson/school
director and dean/separately reporting director, individuals at the rank
of Academic Specialist or Senior Academic Specialist. Appointments may
be made in any academic unit that reports to the Provost or to the Vice
President for Research and Graduate Studies. The principal
responsibilities of the academic specialist fall into one or more of
three functional areas: academic advising/teaching/curriculum
development, research and service/outreach. Academic specialists may be
appointed on a temporary, probationary or continuing basis, full-time or
part-time, with either an academic year (nine-month) or annual
(twelve-month) duty assignment.

Continuing appointment status assures that the academic specialist will
not be dismissed due to capricious action by the University nor will
dismissal be used as a restraint of academic freedom or other civil
rights. Continuing appointment status does not guarantee employment if
positions are not funded, if gross misconduct occurs, if the academic
specialist refuses to perform reasonable assigned duties or fails to
fulfill contractual obligations, or if the academic specialist is no
longer able to perform satisfactorily in his or her professional
capacity at the University.

**Continuing and Probationary Appointments**

An academic specialist who has not served previously at Michigan State
University is appointed initially for a probationary period of three
years and may be reappointed for an additional probationary period of
three years. If an academic specialist is appointed beyond the two
probationary periods, continuing appointment status is granted. If at
any time during these two probationary periods an academic specialist is
promoted to the rank of senior academic specialist, continuing
appointment status is granted.

A senior academic specialist who has not served previously at Michigan
State University is normally appointed for a probationary period of two
to four years. In unusual cases, upon recommendation of the unit
administrator(s) and dean(s) and with the prior approval of the Provost,
an academic specialist initially appointed at the rank of senior
academic specialist may be granted continuing appointment status from
the date of appointment. Individuals appointed at the rank of senior
academic specialist without continuing appointment status have the
option of requesting reappointment at any time prior to the conclusion
of the stipulated probationary appointment period. \[Such early reviews
would occur on the normal review cycle as established by university,
college, and department/school procedures.\] A negative decision on such
a request shall not preclude consideration for reappointment at the time
specified upon appointment.

**Evaluation**

All academic specialists shall be evaluated by the appropriate unit
administrator before the end of the applicable annual duty period for
those on probationary or temporary appointment and at appropriate
intervals for those with continuing appointment status. A unit review
committee will be established to advise the unit administrator about the
reappointment, award of continuing appointment status, or promotion of
the academic specialist with a probationary or continuing appointment.\
\
[Back to Academic Specialist
Handbook](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/academic-specialist-handbook/index.html)
:::

[Â©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/academic-specialist-handbook/appendix_c.pcf)
