---
title: '8.1 Automatic Benefits'
---

::: {#body}
Academic Specialist Manual

**8.1 Automatic Benefits**

::: {xmlns=""}
**8.1.1 Basic Employer Life (Death Benefit)**
:::

Eligibility \
The University provides a life benefit payable to beneficiaries of
academic specialists appointed 50 percent time or more for nine months
or more. This benefit is effective immediately upon appointment.

Coverage

Eligible academic specialists are provided coverage equal to one year\'s
base salary up to a maximum of \$50,000. Beneficiaries are those
designated by the academic specialist or the same as designated in the
Employee-Paid Life program. If no beneficiary has been designated,
payment will be made to the survivor(s) in the first surviving class of
those that follow: a) spouse; b) children; c) parents; or d) brothers
and sisters. If none survives, payment would be made to the estate.

Cost

No enrollment application is necessary and the entire cost of this
benefit is paid by the University.

**8.1.2 Long-Term Disability**

Eligibility

Coverage under the Long-Term Disability Plan is available for academic
specialists appointed full-time for nine months or more who have been
employed for 12 FTE service months. Eligible academic specialists may
receive benefits provided by the Long-Term Disability Plan after six
months of continuous disability.

Coverage

The benefits provide a disabled academic specialist with a monthly
income equal to 60% of the basic monthly salary (minus any workers\'
compensation, social security or auto wage loss benefits, if
applicable). In addition, the program assumes both the academic
specialist\'s contribution and the University\'s contribution to the
base retirement program for as long as the individual remains entitled
to Long-Term Disability benefits. The plan provides an annual
cost-of-living increment of 3%.

Cost:  The cost of this benefit is totally paid by the University.

Other Benefit Information

If the academic specialist is unable to work due to total disability and
is eligible for benefits under the Long-Term Disability Plan, a premium
contribution will be continued in the health, dental and employee-paid
life programs for the academic specialist during the period of
disability benefit payments.

An academic specialist appointed in the continuing appointment system
will continue to accrue service towards retirement eligibility only
through the first two years of long-term disability status. Assuming
appropriate medical authorization, return rights to the current or
equivalent position are retained during the first two years of long-term
disability status.

A fixed term academic specialist (appointment with an end date), who is
eligible for long-term disability, retains return rights to the current
position only through the end date of the fixed term appointment.

**8.1.3 Social Security**

Most academic specialists who perform services for Michigan State
University are covered by Social Security (FICA). Social Security
currently provides retirement benefits subject to age rules and
participation; a lifetime income in the event of total permanent
disability for the academic specialist, and benefits for dependents
subject to certain age rules, and a lump sum payment at death and
monthly income for qualified survivors. (Foreign Nationals presenting F
or J visas may be exempt from provisions of the Social Security
Act\--see Payroll Procedures.) Full information is available from the
local Social Security Office.

**8.1.4 Travel Accident**

The University provides immediate Travel Accident coverage while
traveling on approved University business or activity. This plan
provides accidental death and dismemberment coverage up to \$50,000 and
is automatic for all academic specialists. No enrollment application is
necessary, and the cost is paid by the University.

::: {xmlns=""}
**8.1.5 Workers\' Compensation**
:::

The University, in accordance with the State of Michigan Disability
Compensation Act, provides \"Workers\' Compensation benefits\" if an
academic specialist is injured in the course of employment. These
benefits are payable at a rate of approximately 80% of the after-tax
value of the academic specialist\'s average weekly wage, subject to a
state-determined maximum rate.

Any injury arising out of and in the course of employment must be
reported to the administrative head and Workers\' Compensation. All
necessary medical services for a compensable injury will be delivered by
a medical provider designated by the University. Full information is
available from the Human Resources Office (353-4434).

**8.1.6 Unemployment Compensation**

Most academic specialists at Michigan State University will be in
covered employment and therefore subject to the provisions of the
Unemployment Compensation Act. Full information is available from the
Human Resources Office (353-4434).
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/academic-specialist-handbook/auto_benefits.pcf)
