---
title: '4.8 Initial Continuing and Probationary Appointments'
---

::: {#body}
Academic Specialist Manual

**4.8 Initial Continuing and Probationary Appointments**

::: {xmlns=""}
**4.8.1 Academic Specialist**
:::

An academic specialist who has not served previously at the University
is appointed initially in the Academic Specialist Appointment System for
a probationary period of three years and may be reappointed for an
additional probationary period of three years. If an academic specialist
is appointed beyond the two probationary periods, continuing appointment
status is granted. If at any time during these two probationary periods
an academic specialist is promoted to the rank of senior academic
specialist, continuing appointment status is granted.  Probationary
appointment periods are calculated from August 16 of the calendar year
in which the appointment is effective.

**4.8.2 Senior Academic Specialist**

A senior academic specialist who has not served previously at Michigan
State University is normally appointed in the Academic Specialist
Appointment System for a probationary period of two to four years. In
unusual cases, upon recommendation of the unit administrator(s) and
dean(s) and with the prior approval of the Provost, an academic
specialist initially appointed at the rank of senior academic specialist
may be granted continuing appointment status from the date of
appointment. Individuals appointed at the rank of senior academic
specialist without continuing appointment status have the option of
requesting reappointment at any time prior to the conclusion of the
stipulated probationary appointment period. \[Such early reviews would
occur on the normal review cycle as established by university, college,
and department/school procedures.\] A negative decision on such a
request shall not preclude consideration for reappointment at the time
specified upon appointment. If a senior academic specialist is
reappointed, continuing appointment status is granted.  Probationary
appointment periods are calculated from August 16 of the calendar year
in which the appointment is effective.\
\
[Back to Academic Specialist
Handbook](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/academic-specialist-handbook/index.html)
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/academic-specialist-handbook/cont_probationary_apps.pcf)
