---
title: '06.0 Separation From Employment; Dismissal and Discipline'
---

::: {#body}
Academic Specialist Manual

**6.0 Separation From Employment; Dismissal and Discipline**

A person appointed in the Academic Specialist Appointment System may be
separated from employment, dismissed or disciplined as set forth below.
In all cases of involuntary separation, the individual has access to the
Faculty Grievance Policy.

An academic specialist holding a probationary appointment in the
Academic Specialist Appointment System may not be reappointed due to
unsatisfactory performance (also see Section 6.3.). The procedures set
forth below apply whether the academic specialist is in the first or
second probationary appointment at the time the decision is made not to
reappoint.

#### 6.1.1 Notification of Non-Reappointment Action - Academic Specialist Handbook {#notification-of-non-reappointment-action---academic-specialist-handbook xmlns=""}

An academic specialist in the continuing system who is not to be
recommended for reappointment by the unit administrator must be
notified, in writing, no later than December 15 preceding the expiration
date of the designated probationary appointment. Copies of the
notification letter shall be sent to the dean/separately reporting
director and the Provost. If an academic specialist who was not
recommended for reappointment does not receive proper notification, as
stated in this section, a one-year appointment extension is automatic
and the academic specialist shall consider this arrangement as official
notification of separation from the University at the end of the
one-year extension.

#### 6.1.2 Appealing Non-Reappointment Action - Academic Specialist Handbook {#appealing-non-reappointment-action---academic-specialist-handbook xmlns=""}

Upon receiving notice of non-reappointment, an academic specialist in
the continuing system may request from the administrator responsible for
the recommendation, in writing, the basis of the decision which resulted
in non reappointment. If the academic specialist believes that the
decision not to reappoint was made in a manner which is at variance with
established evaluation procedures, the academic specialist may initiate
action in accordance with the Faculty Grievance Policy.

#### 6.1.3 Appointment Extension - Academic Specialist Handbook {#appointment-extension---academic-specialist-handbook xmlns=""}

An academic specialist not reappointed for the designated probationary
period is not eligible for an additional appointment within the unit as
an academic specialist in the Academic Specialist Appointment System.
However, in special circumstances, with the written agreement of the
academic specialist and on written recommendation of the unit
administrator and the dean/separately reporting director, a probationary
appointment may be extended for one year. Such requests must be approved
by the Provost in writing and must be justified on the basis that such
an appointment is in the best interest of the University.\
\
[Back to Academic Specialist
Handbook](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/academic-specialist-handbook/index.html)
:::

[Â©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/academic-specialist-handbook/dismissal_discipline.pcf)
