---
title: '7.10 Distinguished Academic Staff Award'
---

::: {#body}
Academic Specialist Manual

**7.10 Distinguished Academic Staff Award**

::: {xmlns=""}
The [Distinguished Academic Staff
Award](http://www.ahr.msu.edu/all-university-awards "DASA Award form") recognizes
the outstanding achievements of those professionals who serve the
University in advising, curriculum development, outreach, extension,
research, and teaching. Distinguished Academic Staff Awards are made to
members of the academic staff who are appointed as Academic Specialists
or Michigan State University Extension (MSUE) Academic Staff (faculty
with Extension-supported appointments are not eligible for this award).
Academic specialists who are recipients of a Distinguished Academic
Staff Award are recognized with a \"Distinguished Academic Specialist
Award.\" MSUE academic staff members who are recipients of a
Distinguished Academic Staff Award are recognized with a \"Distinguished
Extension Academic Staff Award.
:::

Up to four Distinguished Academic Staff Awards are given annually. These
awards provide University-wide recognition and reward to outstanding
individuals with careers demonstrating long-term excellence and
exceptional contributions to Michigan State University. Eligibility for
nomination requires a minimum of ten years of continuous MSU employment
as an Academic Specialist or an MSU Extension academic staff member.

Nominations may be initiated by faculty, colleagues, administrators,
alumni, students, faculty organizations or student organizations;
self-nominations are also welcome. To be considered by the University
Distinguished Academic Staff Award Selection Committee, nominations must
have the endorsement of the dean or major administrative unit
administrator.\
\
[Back to Academic Specialist
Handbook](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/academic-specialist-handbook/index.html)
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/academic-specialist-handbook/distinguished_staff_award.pcf)
