---
title: '7.5.1 Medical Leaves'
---

::: {#body}
Academic Specialist Manual

**7.5. Time Off/Leaves**

 01/01/2017

### 7.5.1 Medical Leaves  Short-Term Disability {#medical-leaves-short-term-disability xmlns=""}

Faculty and academic staff (including academic specialists) who are
appointed on a full time basis (or on a part time basis at 50 percent or
more time for nine months or more) are immediately eligible for up to
six months of paid leave if health problems prevent the individual from
working. (Normally, short term disability leave related to pregnancy,
childbirth and/or recovery is for six weeks, but may be longer with
proper medical certification.)  In such cases of short term disability
leave, additional leave under the Parental Leave policy for faculty and
academic staff may be provided. It is the responsibility of the
individual faculty/academic staff member to promptly notify the
department chairperson, director, or immediate supervisor of absence due
to illness or disability.

If other members of the faculty/academic staff assume the duties of the
individual on a temporary basis without additional cost to the
University, no formal report of the absence beyond the dean or director
of the major academic unit is required during a four week period.

If the absence extends or is expected to extend beyond four weeks, a
leave of absence beginning with the first day of absence should be
requested by the individual or if the individual is unable to make the
request, by the department chairperson or director, through the office
of the dean to the provost for reporting to the president and Board of
Trustees. The leave of absence form must be accompanied by medical
certification specifying the dates of the period of disability.

Faculty/academic staff returning from medical leave may be required to
obtain approval from the attending physician before returning to work.

### Long-Term Disability {#long-term-disability xmlns=""}

If disability of an academic specialist appointed for nine months or
more on a full-time basis extends or is likely to extend beyond six
months, the Human Resources Office should be contacted immediately for
information on applying for benefits under the Long-Term Disability plan
and Social Security.

### Parental Leave {#parental-leave xmlns=""}

Faculty and academic staff (including academic specialists) who are
appointed on at least a 50 percent basis for nine months or more are
eligible for parental leave in accordance with this policy.  This policy
is to be read in coordination with the Short-Term Disability policy and
the Family and Medical Leave Policy for faculty and academic staff.  In
cases where a faculty/academic staff member provides medical
certification that she is unable to work due to a disability related to
pregnancy, childbirth and/or recovery, such absences will be covered by
the Short Term Disability Policy for faculty and academic staff. 
Normally, short term disability leave related to pregnancy, childbirth
and/or recovery is for 6 weeks but may be longer with proper medical
certification.

Faculty and academic staff are eligible to receive up to six (6) weeks
of paid parental leave in connection with the birth of a child.  Faculty
and academic staff who adopt a child younger than age six and/or not
attending school full-time are eligible to receive up to six (6) weeks
of paid parental leave.  Additional unpaid leave may be available for
the birth of a child or the placement of a child for adoption or foster
care in accordance with the Family and Medical Leave Policy and/or the
policy regarding Leaves of Absence Without Pay for faculty and academic
staff.

In situations where the University employs both parents of a
newborn/adopted child as faculty/academic staff, each may have six (6)
weeks of paid parental leave under this policy. Parents employed in the
same department or school should plan the timing of their leaves in
consultation with the chairperson, school director, or dean. Depending
on the circumstances, additional unpaid leave may be available pursuant
to the Family and Medical Leave Policy or with the approval of the
academic unit administrator.

Requests for parental leave must be accompanied by evidence of adoption
or by a health care provider's medical certification that provides the
projected delivery date.  Faculty and academic staff are expected to
make leave arrangements with the academic unit administrator as far in
advance as possible. The timing of parental leave can be arranged to
provide some variation in scheduling the leave of absence period before
and/or after the projected delivery/adoption date in recognition of
constraints associated with academic responsibilities. Faculty and
academic staff are encouraged to schedule leave periods with input from
the academic unit administrator regarding the needs of the individual
unit.

Leave for purposes relating to ongoing child care is not to be confused
with parental leave or medical leave of absence relating to pregnancy
and child birth.  Faculty and academic staff may arrange to use
available vacation time or leave without pay for child care purposes
with the approval of the academic unit administrator.

### Family and Medical Leave {#family-and-medical-leave xmlns=""}

The Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) of 1993 requires that eligible
employees be allowed to take unpaid leave, or paid leave if earned, for
a period of up to twelve work weeks in any twelve month period (defined
by MSU as the fiscal year, i.e., July 1 through June 30) in the event of
the birth of a child or the placement of a child for adoption or foster
care; because the employee is needed to care for a family member (child,
spouse or parent) with a serious health condition; or because an
employee\'s own serious health condition makes them unable to do their
job. Health and dental benefits, if enrolled, will be maintained at the
same level and under the same conditions as coverage would have been
provided if the faculty/academic staff member were continuously employed
during the entire leave period.  The Act provides that this leave may be
taken intermittently or on a reduced leave schedule.

Faculty and academic staff (including academic specialists) who have
regular appointments of nine months or longer at 50% time or more and
have been employed by MSU for at least twelve months and have at least
1,250 hours of service during the twelve months immediately preceding
the commencement of FMLA leave are eligible under FMLA.  Faculty and
academic staff with fixed-term appointments of less than nine months or
less than 50% time who have been employed by MSU for at least 12 months
and have at least 1,250 hours of service during the twelve months
immediately preceding the commencement of FMLA leave are also eligible.

Faculty and academic staff are required to use paid leave provided by
the short-term disability leave of absence policy (see preceding
section) in the case of pregnancy, childbirth and/or recovery or their
own \"serious health condition\" and count it toward the twelve weeks of
leave permitted under the FMLA.  Short term absences that are not
\"serious health conditions\" do not count toward the twelve weeks of
FMLA leave.  Faculty and academic staff may choose to use vacation leave
for all or part of any otherwise unpaid FMLA leave, e.g., for the
\"serious health condition\" of a family member.  Vacation leave for
such purposes is counted toward the twelve weeks of leave permitted
under the FMLA.

FMLA leave shall be concurrent with parental and other paid/unpaid
leaves of absence taken for FMLA reasons.  For example, faculty and
academic staff are not entitled to an additional twelve weeks of FMLA
leave for birth of a child after the conclusion of a 12-week leave
provided under the short-term disability and parental leave policies.

FMLA leave will not be provided beyond the end date of a fixed-term
appointment.

Faculty and academic staff must provide their department
chairperson/school director at least 30 days advance notice before FMLA
leave is to begin if the need for the leave is foreseeable.  Otherwise,
notice must be given as soon as practicable.  Units may require medical
certification to support a request for leave because of a serious health
condition and may require second or third opinions (at the unit\'s
expense) and a fitness for duty report to return to work.

Questions regarding the FMLA may be directed to your department/school
or Human Resources (353-4434).

### 7.5.2 Vacation - Academic Specialist Handbook {#vacation---academic-specialist-handbook xmlns=""}

The University provides vacation leave to academic specialists who are
appointed on an annual year basis under the following conditions:

#### Eligibility {#eligibility xmlns=""}

::: {xmlns="" style="text-align: left;"}
1.  Academic specialists holding appointments on an annual year basis,
    with more than six months\' service, are eligible for annual
    vacation leaves. Academic specialists holding academic year
    appointments are not eligible for vacation leave.
2.  Academic specialists holding appointments on an annual year basis
    receive annual vacation leave equivalent to one month (22 working
    days) in twelve months. Proportional allowances are granted to
    appointees with more than six months of service but less than
    twelve. Vacation allowances are granted on July 1 of each year.
    Vacation time is to be charged against this accrual; the accrual
    will be proportionately reduced in the event of
    resignation/termination during the fiscal year or for other
    non-accrual time, such as worker\'s compensation, long term
    disability, etc.
3.  Part-time academic specialists holding appointments for fifty
    percent or more time on an annual year basis receive vacation on a
    proportional basis.
4.  Vacation must be taken during the fiscal year.
5.  Vacation leave may not exceed one month (22 working days) in the
    fiscal year and is not cumulative.
:::

### Scheduling {#scheduling xmlns=""}

Each department is responsible for scheduling vacations in order not to
interfere with the operation of the department and to ensure that each
academic specialist receives the appropriate vacation allowance during
the appointment period. Although the scheduling preference of the
academic specialist should be considered, vacations have to be scheduled
to meet the instructional and research requirements of the department.
Units that experience \"slack\" or \"down\" periods may require that
vacations be taken during these times (e.g., December recess, summer
recess, etc.). When practical, academic specialists should be informed
of such requirements in advance.

### Pay in Lieu of Vacation {#pay-in-lieu-of-vacation xmlns=""}

Actual time off from work during the appointment period must be taken in
order to receive compensation for vacation time. Payment in lieu of
vacation may be approved only in case of retirement or termination for
any cause (resignation, death, etc.).

Pay in lieu of vacation shall not exceed payment for one month less
vacation time used during the fiscal year. Neither vacation time nor pay
in lieu of vacation can be granted prior to eligibility for vacation
allowance.

### Transfers {#transfers xmlns=""}

Unused vacation allowance not exceeding one month will be transferred
with an academic specialist when the individual transfers from one
position, budget or operating unit to another. If an academic specialist
is transferred to a professional, administrative, or other type of
appointment, a transfer of the balance based on one month less actual
vacation days used during the past fiscal year will be made.

Each department, school, or other administrative unit is responsible for
scheduling vacation time off for academic specialists, maintaining
vacation usage records, and if an academic specialist transfers to
another unit, for notifying the academic specialist of unused vacation
time in writing. A copy of the notification must be sent to the academic
specialist\'s new unit.

### 7.5.3 Holidays {#holidays xmlns=""}

The University observes six legal holidays by closing offices and
dismissing classes. They are: New Year\'s Day, Memorial Day,
Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving, and Christmas Day. In
addition, the Friday following Thanksgiving Day, and as stipulated by
the University based on the calendar, the working days preceding or
following Christmas Day and New Year\'s Day are granted as holidays.

### 7.5.4 Leaves of Absence Without Pay {#leaves-of-absence-without-pay xmlns=""}

Leaves of absence without pay may be granted with the recommendation of
the department chairperson and dean. Specific dates for the leave must
be specified in the request and should be made as far in advance as
possible, so that neither instruction nor research programs will be
interrupted. Such leaves usually do not extend beyond one year.

Academic specialists should contact the Human Resources Office to make
arrangements for continuation of their benefit programs.

### 7.5.5 Military Service Leaves {#military-service-leaves xmlns=""}

::: {xmlns="" style="text-align: left;"}
The University cooperates fully with academic specialists taking part in
the reserve program of the military forces which calls for up to 15
days\' active duty training annually with the National Guard, Officers\'
Reserve Corps, or similar U.S. military organizations. The University
will pay the academic specialist the difference between military pay and
allowances and normal take-home pay for up to 15 calendar days when
ordered to active duty for training, and for up to ten additional
calendar days per fiscal year when ordered to active duty for the
purpose of handling civil disorders.
:::

When an academic specialist enters the armed forces, it is the policy of
the University to grant, on request, a leave of absence to cover the
term of service.

### 7.5.6 Continuation of Benefits Leave of Absence No Pay {#continuation-of-benefits-leave-of-absence-no-pay xmlns=""}

While on Leave of Absence No Pay Status to Receive Prestigious Awards,
Fellowships and/or Special Assignment Opportunities

Academic specialists holding fixed term appointments who have completed
60 FTE Service months and academic specialists holding a full-time
appointment in the Academic Specialist Continuing Appointment System who
are recipients of prestigious awards or fellowships or participate in
special assignment opportunities which are in the interest of both the
individual and the University are eligible to request coverage under
this policy. For academic specialists with fixed term appointments,
benefits continue only for the period of the leave, which would not
extend beyond the end date of the appointment.

Continuing professional development that is in the interest of both the
individual academic specialist and the University may be facilitated
when an academic specialist receives a prestigious award, fellowship, or
special assignment opportunity requiring a leave of absence without pay
or a reduction in percent employment below full-time, normally for
periods usually six months or longer.

Examples of prestigious awards, fellowships, and special assignment
opportunities for which leaves of absence without pay often are
requested include the following:

::: {xmlns="" style="text-align: left;"}
-   Prestigious awards and/or fellowships provided by national and
    international organizations and foundations supporting research and
    scholarship broadly defined, for example, those provided by the
    National Endowment for the Arts/Humanities, Guggenheim Foundation,
    Fulbright Commission, Rockefeller Foundation, National Science
    Foundation, Social Science Research Council.
-   Prestigious awards and/or fellowships provided by national and
    international organizations and foundations supporting research and
    scholarships in specific disciplines, for example, those provided by
    the Wenner-Green Foundation for Anthropological Research, Charles
    Warren Center (of Harvard University), Sloan Foundation, and Robert
    Wood Johnson Foundation.
-   Assignments with international, national, and state public agencies
    and institutions, private businesses, foundations, and
    organizations, and professional associations.
-   International exchange programs and participation in
    teaching/scholarly activities with educational institutions in other
    countries with which Michigan State University has important formal
    cooperation or linkage agreements.
:::

There are instances when such awards, fellowships, and special
assignment opportunities, as a consequence of the policy of the source
institution, do not include benefits similar to those provided by
Michigan State University for full-time academic specialists with
continuing appointments.

### Request Procedures {#request-procedures xmlns=""}

On receipt of the above-referenced types of awards, fellowships, and
special assignment opportunities for which the source institution does
not provide applicable benefits, an academic specialist may request,
with written endorsement of the applicable chairperson/director and
dean, that the Office of the Provost arrange with the Human Resources
Office for the continuation of the applicable University benefits (see
below) not provided by the source agency or institution. Such written
requests must provide a statement that the leave of absence without pay
is to accept a prestigious award, fellowship, or other special
assignment opportunity that is in the interest of both the individual
and the University. Information in support of the request must include:
a) specifics of the award/fellowship or assignment, including the
regular University benefits provided as well as not provided by the
source agency/institution; b) documentation from the source agency/
institution of its benefits policy; c) the specific assignment(s) to be
performed while on leave of absence without pay; and d) how the
activities entailed in the award, fellowship, or special assignment
opportunity advance the interests of the individual and the University.
Requests must be initiated by the academic specialist. The continuation
of benefits is not an entitlement; each case is to be reviewed on its
merits.

On approval of such requests, the Office of the Provost will arrange
with the Human Resources Office for continuation of the benefits stated
below for a leave without pay of up to one year, with an additional one
year extension based on a written request approved by the
chairperson(s)/director(s), dean(s), and the Provost. In exceptional
cases, benefit eligibility may be continued for an additional period.

### Possible Benefit Coverage {#possible-benefit-coverage xmlns=""}

Those benefits set forth below which are not provided by the applicable
source agency/institution\--for which full-time Michigan State
University academic specialists appointed nine months or more are now
eligible\--may be provided for academic specialists for whom continued
benefits eligibility is approved by the Office of the Provost. (The
benefits continued will be limited to those in force for the individual
immediately prior to leave of absence without pay status):

::: {xmlns="" style="text-align: left;"}
-   Health care coverage with applicable University contribution;
-   Dental plan coverage;
-   Expanded life plan (for 180 days from the last day paid by MSU);
-   Long-Term Disability (LTD);
-   Employee-paid life plan if the employee continues to pay premium;
-   Accidental Death and Dismemberment coverage if the employee
    continues to pay premium;
-   Travel Accident if traveling on authorized MSU business during
    leave.
:::

Salary-related benefits, e.g., University contributions to the 403(b)
Base Retirement Program, social security, etc., will not be provided
during a leave of absence without pay. Continued benefits which are
linked to an individual\'s salary status, e.g., expanded life, LTD, will
be based on the applicable base wage immediately prior to the leave of
absence without pay.

Requests for eligibility under this program should be directed to the
Associate Provost and Associate Vice President for Academic Human
Resources after review and concurrence by the chairperson(s) and
dean(s)/separately reporting director(s).\
\
[Back to Academic Specialist
Handbook](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/academic-specialist-handbook/index.html)
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/academic-specialist-handbook/medical_leaves.pcf)
