---
title: '4.2 Letter of Offer'
---

::: {#body}
Academic Specialist Manual

**4.2 Letter of Offer**

The letter of offer for probationary appointments shall include
information on the length of the initial probationary appointment, the
initial salary level, and the opportunity for additional probationary
reappointments. Specific information about conditions which may affect
reappointments should be provided. If an appointment is on an annual
basis, a statement that the University\'s basic appointment commitment
is for an academic year appointment only must be provided in the letter
of offer (see
Sections [4.3 ](/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/academic-specialist-handbook/app_period.html "Appointment Period")and [4.6](/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/academic-specialist-handbook/change_annual_ay.html "Continuing Appointment")).

The letter of offer for appointments in the Academic Specialist
continuing appointment system shall include the [offer letter
attachments](/ua/hiring/documents/FAS_Offer_Letter_Attachments.pdf).

The letter of offer for fixed term appointments shall include
information on the beginning and ending dates of the appointment, the
salary level, and a statement that the University is not obligated to
provide reappointment or extension of the fixed term appointment beyond
the ending date (see [Section
4.9](/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/academic-specialist-handbook/fixed-term_app.html "Fixed-Term Appointment")).

The letter of offer to a foreign national shall also state that the
offer is contingent on his/her securing valid immigration status and
work authorization before the expected start date and maintaining valid
immigration status and work authorization throughout the employment. For
the limited purpose of complying with federal export control
regulations, the foreign national may be required to provide information
about his/her citizenship status depending on the nature of the
employment activities. If subject to federal export control regulations,
the foreign national may also be required to maintain full-time
employment status at MSU, confirm that his/her permanent abode
throughout the period of employment is in the U.S., and sign a
confidentiality agreement concerning transfer of certain technical data.
See 22 CFR 125.4. Prior to beginning work, all foreign nationals should
contact the Office of Export Control and Trade Sanctions at (517)
432-4499 or export@msu.edu to ensure compliance with export control
requirements.

All letters of offer for academic year (AY) appointments must specify
that the academic year duty period is August 16 through May 15, with pay
received over the duty period.\
\
\
[Back to Academic Specialist
Handbook](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/academic-specialist-handbook/index.html)
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/academic-specialist-handbook/offer_letter.pcf)
