---
title: '8.2 Optional Benefits'
---

::: {#body}
Academic Specialist Manual

**8.2 Optional Benefits**

::: {xmlns=""}
**8.2.1 Accidental Death & Dismemberment (AD&D)**
:::

Eligibility\
Academic specialists may select the AD&D Program within 30 days of
initial appointment. Coverage is provided if death or dismemberment
results from accidental cause. All academic specialists appointed
full-time or part-time for nine months or more are eligible to
participate.

Coverage\
Coverage may be selected for the academic specialist and the family, if
desired, in one of the varying amounts as shown in the brochure.
Beneficiaries are designated by the individual and may be changed at any
time.

Cost\
Cost of the various coverages offered is described in the brochure
available in the Human Resources Office.

**8.2.2 Dental Plan**

Academic specialists appointed 50 percent time or more for nine months
or more and their eligible dependents may be covered by a dental plan.
The benefit can be retroactive to the appointment date if a new employee
enrolls within 30 days of the appointment. Failure to enroll during the
initial 30-day eligibility period will result in the academic specialist
having to wait until the next annual open enrollment period. This
coverage is available to official retirees and their eligible dependents
or survivors.

Coverage \
Dental plan coverage is available under a traditional plan with Delta
Dental or Aetna Dental Maintenance Organization (DMO).The Delta Dental
Plan covers fifty percent of the usual, customary, and reasonable cost
of preventive, diagnostic, restorative, prosthodontics and orthodontic
services. The plan provides an individual maximum of \$600 per calendar
year for covered charges. Orthodontic coverage is limited to those under
19 years of age and is subject to an individual lifetime maximum of
\$600.

The Aetna (DMO) is a managed care dental plan that uses primary care
dentists to lower the cost. Benefits are provided with a fixed dollar
copay. Some benefits, such as diagnostic, preventive, and minor
restorative are covered at no cost to the member. There are no
deductibles, annual maximums, or lifetime maximums. Orthodontic services
are covered for children and adults with a \$1,500 copay.

Cost\
Premiums are fully paid by the University for full-time academic
specialists for the Delta Dental Plan. There will be a premium deduction
for the Aetna DMO plan. There may be premium deduction for part-time
employees depending on the percent of employment and the number of
persons being covered.

**8.2.3 Employee-Paid Life**

An academic specialist may select employee-paid life within 30 days of
initial appointment or by furnishing evidence of insurability during
Open Enrollment.

Eligibility \
Academic specialists appointed 50 percent time or more for nine months
or more are eligible to enroll for life coverage.

Coverage \
Coverage may be selected in increments ranging from 1-8 times an
academic specialist\'s base annual earnings up to the maximum of
\$2,000,000.  Rates for this coverage vary depending on age. Optional
dependent coverage (for spouse or Other Eligible Individual and
children, if any) may also be selected.

Benefits are payable to the designated beneficiary in the event of death
from any cause while the plan is in force. Beneficiaries are designated
by the academic specialist and may be changed at any time.

Cost\
Costs vary according to the plan selected; rates are subject to future
group experience.

**8.2.4 Health Plan Coverage**

If academic specialists enroll in health plan coverage within 30 days of
initial appointment to an eligible status or during an Open Enrollment,
academic specialists and their eligible dependents are covered for
health plan services. Health plan coverage is available under a
preferred provider organization (PPO), health maintenance organization
(HMO) or a High-deductible Health Plan with a Health Savings Account.
Coverage is currently provided by Community Blue (PPO), Blue Care
Network (HMO) or Consumer Driven Health Plan (CDHP). The benefit can be
retroactive to the appointment date if a new employee enrolls within 60
days of the appointment. Specific coverage details under these plans
differ. In general, the following apply:

Eligibility\
Academic specialists appointed 50% time or more for nine months or more
are entitled to enroll themselves and their eligible dependents. Failure
to enroll during the initial 30-day eligibility period will result in
the academic specialist having to wait until the next annual open
enrollment period.

Coverage\
Plan details can be found
at [http://www.hr.msu.edu/benefits/healthcare/index.html](https://hr.msu.edu/benefits/healthcare/index.html)

Prescription Drugs\
The prescription drug plan is a co-pay plan for generic or brand drugs
and is administered through Caremark. Caremark has a large network of
over 51,000 participating retail pharmacies, including some of the
largest drug store chains. Employees may choose to purchase their
prescriptions at a participating retail pharmacy, at an MSU pharmacy
(Olin Health Center or the MSU Clinical Center pharmacies) or through
Caremark\'s mail order program.

[Caremark
Copays](/benefits/prescription-drug-plan/caremark-copay.html "Caremark Copays") -
View Caremark Copay Chart

Cost\
The University provides a monthly contribution toward the premium for
health coverage for eligible academic specialists. If an additional
premium is required, it will be deducted from the academic specialist\'s
paycheck. The University does not make a contribution during periods
when an academic specialist does not receive a check.

**8.2.5 Waiver of Health Plan Coverage**

An academic specialist may elect to waive MSU\'s health plan coverage in
exchange for cash payment if covered by another group health plan (e.g.,
have health care coverage through their spouse or another employer) that
adequately meets health care needs. The waiver period is January 1
through December 31 with payment to be received the following February.\
\
Eligibility \
Academic specialists appointed 50% time or more for nine months or more
are eligible to waive MSU\'s health plan coverage within 30 days of
appointment or during the annual open enrollment period. A completed
form is not required each year during open enrollment to continue the
waiver. \
\
Cost \
The University provides up to a \$600 cash payment the following
February to the academic specialist. Individuals accrue points based on
their employment percent and the number of months enrolled in the
program. The payment is also prorated for those newly hired, going on an
unpaid leave of absence, or terminating employment. The payment is
considered taxable income.

**8.2.6 Flexible Spending Account**

Flexible Spending Accounts enable you to save money by paying for some
expenses in pre-tax dollars. Here you\'ll find everything you need to
make informed choices about your Flexible Spending Account Enrollment.

**Dependent Care Flexible Spending Accounts (Dependent Care FSA)**

The Dependent Care Flexible Spending Account (Dependent Care FSA) is a
benefit to help you meet your dependent care expenses, such as; child
care, elder care or disabled dependent care. It enables you to save
money, on a calendar year basis, by paying for dependent care expenses
in pre-tax dollars.

The annual maximum reimbursement for Dependent Care FSA is \$5000 per
family.

 

**8.2.7 Health Flexible Spending Account (Health FSA)**

The Health Flexible Spending Account (Health FSA) program is a cost
effective way to pay for medical and dental plan deductibles/copayments,
eyeglasses, contact lenses, orthodontics and other health-related
expenses that are not covered by insurance. It enables you to save
money, on a calendar year basis, by paying for health related expenses
in pre-tax dollars.

The annual maximum reimbursement for Health FSA is \$2,500 per eligible
employee for 2015, and \$2,550 per eligible employee for 2016.

For plan changes and vendor information, please see [Flexible Spending
Account](/benefits/flexible-spending-accounts/index.html) on the HR
website.\
\
[Back to Academic Specialist
Handbook](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/academic-specialist-handbook/index.html)
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/academic-specialist-handbook/optional_benefits.pcf)
