---
title: '7.6 Professional Development'
---

::: {#body}
Academic Specialist Manual

**7.6 Professional Development**

::: {xmlns=""}
The academic specialist, as any other professional employee, is expected
to continually develop personal abilities and stature in appropriate
areas of endeavor. The University should promote and facilitate such
professional development activities at a level consistent with its
international status and as a premier land grant University. Those
activities in which the academic specialist should participate and
receive University support include the following:
:::

**[]{#continuing}7.6.1 Continuing Education**

Continuing education provides one mechanism for the professional growth
of an individual. Such education may consist of participation in
seminars, workshops, short courses, and other short-term training
programs. Participation in credit courses involves a longer commitment
by the individual. Finally, participation in a degree-granting program
typically spans several years. The University may provide substantive
support to the continuing education of the academic specialist in two
ways: release time from duty assignments for the pursuit of such
educational opportunities, and/or the reimbursement of expenses incurred
in activities such as seminars, workshops or other non-credit offerings.
Such substantive support is not guaranteed but may be granted with
approval of the academic specialist\'s unit administrator. The granting
of such support will depend on, among other things, the value that such
education will bring not only to the individual but also to the
University. The academic specialist will have to submit a written plan
in advance requesting support for such activities. For short-term
informal course work, a travel authorization will suffice. The
appropriateness of a particular plan of formal or informal course work
for the academic specialist will be determined by that individual and
the administrator involved.

Release time for attending courses or training programs on either a
non-degree or degree basis may be granted with approval of the academic
specialist\'s unit administrator. The unit is responsible for any
adjustments in staffing that may be necessitated by the release time
granted to the individual. If more individuals within a particular unit
request release time than can be accommodated by the unit, some of the
individuals will have to defer to an alternate time. In any case, an
individual may carry no more than an average of four credits a semester
requiring release time during any two semesters within a calendar year.

In some cases, reimbursement of some or all expenses such as tuition
related to a degree program may be granted. \[Internal Revenue Code
(IRC) Section 127 allows tax-exemption for graduate-level, degree
related courses that are reimbursed by employers up to an annual maximum
of \$5,250. To qualify, the individual must submit a written plan for
the course of study to the unit administrator. This plan must
demonstrate the value of such education to the unit as well as to the
individual. An academic specialist may not apply for such educational
assistance until the individual has served three years in the position.
Reimbursement will require satisfactory performance in the course work.
The plan and the individual\'s progress must be reviewed each term by
the unit administrator. The individual and the unit administrator will
be responsible for obtaining the funds from appropriate
department/school and/or major administrative unit sources to provide
the educational reimbursements. The arrangement for any release time
associated with the plan of study will be handled independently of the
reimbursement considerations. Finally, the individual will be obligated
to remain employed at the University for one 9- or 12-month duty
assignment, as applicable, after the completion of the last course for
which the individual will receive financial assistance.

**[]{#ProfOrgs}7.6.2 Participation in Professional and Scholarly
Organizations**

Attendance at professional meetings and programs requires approval of
the unit administrator. Such approval is required for release time,
insurance purposes, and reimbursement of expenses.

**[]{#extendrelease}7.6.3 Extended Release Time, Assignment to Scholarly
Duties**

Extended release time and temporary reassignment to scholarly duties may
be granted to assist academic specialists with continuing appointment
status to enhance professional competency and for scholarly pursuit.
Such activities are intended for the mutual benefit of the University
and the academic specialist. The purpose is to encourage academic and
institutional revitalization by providing sustained time for
research/creative activities; development of new courses or programs;
acquisition of expanded and/or new qualifications and skills;
contribution to academic unit plans to improve and/or refocus
instructional, research, or public service activities in accordance with
the missions of the University.

Extended changes of duty assignment are not granted automatically and
must be approved by the appropriate academic administrator. Such
activities must be requested in writing by the academic specialist and
directed to the appropriate unit administrator. Requests must include a
detailed description outlining the purposes, objectives and scholarly
and research activities of the proposed duty assignment. The plan should
indicate how the objectives and accomplishments of the new assignment
will advance the interests and capabilities of the academic specialist
for fulfilling the aims, objectives and goals of the department/school,
college or University. Changes of duty assigned for more than six months
require approval of the dean and the Office of the Provost. Funding for
extended release time and assignment to scholarly duties is provided by
the unit.\
\
[Back to Academic Specialist
Handbook](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/academic-specialist-handbook/index.html)
:::

[Â©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/academic-specialist-handbook/professional_dev.pcf)
