---
title: '5.3 Reappointment, Continuing Appointment, and Promotion'
---

::: {#body}
Academic Specialist Manual

**5.3 Reappointment, Continuing Appointment, and Promotion**

::: {xmlns=""}
For academic specialists with continuing system appointments,
evaluations are based on the specifics of the individual\'s assignment
and on the effectiveness in the appropriate functional area(s):
advising/teaching/ curriculum development, research, or
service/outreach. The kinds of evidence to be considered must be
established at the time of appointment. The academic specialist should
have the opportunity to submit evidence supporting the proposed
reappointment, promotion or award of continuing appointment status.
Reappointment, award of continuing appointment status, or promotion must
promote the objectives of improving academic strength and quality (see
Appendix A).\
\

#### 5.3.1 Unit Review by Colleagues - Academic Specialist Handbook

A unit review committee will be established to advise the unit
administrator about the reappointment, award of continuing appointment
status, or promotion of the academic specialist. Every attempt should be
made to ensure that the review committee is composed of individuals
knowledgeable about the position under review and the Academic
Specialist Appointment System and should include at least one academic
specialist. An academic specialist from outside the unit can be
appointed, if necessary, with a voice but no vote. The committee may
also include faculty, members of other academic personnel systems, or
University support staff members. The academic specialist under review
must be provided an opportunity to confer with the review committee
before it provides advice to the unit administrator regarding
reappointment, promotion or award of continuing appointment status.\
\

#### 5.3.2 Other Contributions to Review Process - Academic Specialist Handbook

In addition to the review committee\'s advice, the unit administrator
may also consult with administrative staff, faculty, students, and/or
other qualified individuals inside or outside the unit regarding the
reappointment or promotion review. The academic specialist should be
informed of those individuals from whom the unit administrator is
requesting advice; the academic specialist is not informed of those
individuals who provide letters of evaluation, unless stipulated by unit
policy.\
\

#### 5.3.3 Reappointment Recommendation Schedule - Academic Specialist Handbook

For academic specialists in the continuing system, reappointment and
promotion recommendations must be submitted to the Office of the Provost
for review and final action in April of the calendar year prior to the
end of the probationary appointment. The individual must be notified in
writing by December 15 of the same year. Probationary appointment
periods are calculated from August 16 of the calendar year in which the
appointment is effective, irrespective of the actual date of
appointment. In accordance with the Board of Trustees\' delegation of
academic personnel actions, the Office of the Provost approves all
Academic Specialist Appointment System personnel actions; these actions
are reported to the Michigan State University Board of Trustees as
information items.\
\
[Back to Academic Specialist
Handbook](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/academic-specialist-handbook/index.html)
:::
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/academic-specialist-handbook/reapp_cont-app_promotion.pcf)
