---
title: '2.1 Annual Evaluations'
---

::: {#body}
Archivist Handbook

**2.1 Annual Evaluations**

A.  All archivists are to be evaluated annually based on a schedule
ranging from July to June of the following year. Archivists in the
continuous appointment system shall be evaluated to determine progress
toward goals and/or the identification of goals. The annual evaluation
may also assist in the assignment of merit and other salary adjustments.
A written summary of this evaluation shall be placed in the archivist\'s
personnel file in the department and given to the archivist within
thirty (30) days of the evaluation. Unit administrators must review such
evaluations personally with the archivist. If, after receiving the
written review, the archivist disagrees with its content or chooses to
provide additional documentation or comment, the archivist shall have an
opportunity to respond to the review. Any additional written comments
and/or documentation which is submitted within one month of receipt of
the written review shall become part of the documentation for the
review.

Self-evaluations are due to the Director or Assistant Director by June 1
and should include a summary of activities and accomplishments performed
in the academic year. In developing the self-evaluation document, the
archivist analyzes and appraises his/her own performance in relation to
his/her current goals and objectives statement. The archivist prepares
the document objectively, focusing both upon those objectives that were
attained, and the degree of attainment, as well as upon objectives that
were not attained. In addition to job performance accomplishments, any
scholarly and creative activities and service activities should be
included. The annual performance evaluation will be used in the
Reappointment, Continuous Appointment and Promotion (RECAP) process.

Archivists will be evaluated on their performance and to the extent to
which she/he met expectations. There are three performance levels
archivists can achieve:

-   Did Not Meet Expectations: Fails to meet the performance
    expectations.  Needs substantial improvement in performance in many
    areas of job responsibility and goal attainment.
-   Met Expectations: Achieved acceptable performance in major areas of
    job responsibility or goal attainment. However, higher performance
    is required to achieve reappointment, continuous appointment and/or
    promotion.
-   Exceeded Expectations: Meets all performance expectations and
    exceeds expectations in several areas of job responsibility and goal
    attainment.

**It is expected that archivists in the continuous appointment system
strive for excellence. A performance level of \"Exceeded expectations\"
in major areas of responsibility for at least two years is required for
reappointment, continuous appointment and/or promotion.**

See [Appendix
A](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/archivist-handbook/appendix_a_self-eval.html)
for the self-evaluation form.

See [Appendix
B](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/archivist-handbook/appendix_b_goals.html)
for information on writing goals and objectives and sample statements.\
\
[Back to the Archivist
Handbook](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/archivist-handbook/index.html)
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/archivist-handbook/annual_evals.pcf)
