---
title: '1.4. Terms of Appointment'
---

::: {#body}
Archivist Handbook

**1.4. Terms of Appointment**

Under the continuous appointment system, archivists are appointed to
positions ranked at three (3) levels: Archivist I, II, and III. The
individual archivist will be notified of required reappointment and
continuous appointment deliberations and must submit a dossier to the
Director of the University Archives for consideration by the
Reappointment, Continuous Appointment and Promotion (RECAP) Committee.
Probationary appointment periods are calculated from August 16 of the
calendar year in which the appointment is effective.

### **Archivist I** {#archivist-i xmlns=""}

An Archivist I is initially appointed in the continuous appointment
system for a probationary period that expires on the fourth August 15
after the appointment year and may be reappointed for an additional
probationary period of three years. If at any time during these two
probationary periods an Archivist I is promoted to the rank of Archivist
II, continuous appointment is granted. If not promoted to Archivist II
at the conclusion of the second probationary period of three years, the
individual is ineligible for an additional reappointment. Individuals
appointed as Archivist I without continuous appointment have the option
of requesting promotion to Archivist II with continuous appointment at
any point (during a normal review cycle) prior to the conclusion of the
stipulated probationary appointment period. A negative decision on such
a request shall not preclude consideration for reappointment at the
normal time.

To be considered for reappointment to a second three-year probationary
period, the archivist must submit a dossier no later than the third July
1st after his or her appointment year. The initial probationary
appointment will terminate on its specified end date unless the
archivist is reappointed for a second probationary period.

### **Archivist II** {#archivist-ii xmlns=""}

An Archivist II is appointed in the continuous appointment system for a
probationary period that expires on the fourth August 15 after the
appointment year. If an Archivist II is reappointed, continuous
appointment is granted. Individuals appointed as Archivist II without
continuous appointment have the option of requesting reappointment at
any point (during a normal review cycle) prior to the conclusion of the
stipulated probationary appointment period. A negative decision on such
a request shall not preclude consideration for reappointment at the time
specified upon appointment.

To be considered for reappointment with continuous appointment status,
the archivist must submit a dossier no later than the third July 1st
after his or her appointment year. The probationary appointment will
terminate on its specified end date unless the archivist is reappointed
with continuous appointment.

### Archivist III {#archivist-iii xmlns=""}

An Archivist III is granted continuous appointment (appointment for an
indefinite period without a terminal date) from the date of appointment
at that level.\
\
[Back to the Archivist
Handbook](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/archivist-handbook/index.html)
:::

[Â©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/archivist-handbook/appointment_terms.pcf)
