---
title: '1.1 Continuous Appointment System - Definition'
---

::: {#body}
Archivist Handbook

**1.1 Continuous Appointment System - Definition**

Continuous appointment, as used in this statement, assures an archivist
that she/he will not be dismissed due to capricious action by the UAHC
administration nor will dismissal be used as a restraint on the
archivist\'s exercise of academic freedom. Continuous appointment does
not guarantee employment if positions are not funded, if there are gross
violations of University or UAHC policies, if the archivist refuses to
perform reasonable assigned duties or fails to fulfill contractual
obligations, or if the archivist no longer renders satisfactory
performance in his or her professional capacity at the University.

Appointments in the continuous appointment system are only at the ranks
of Archivist I, Archivist II, or Archivist III.

Assignments for archivists involve applicable assigned duties
(reference, processing, outreach, instruction, records management,
electronic records management) and related professional development
activities.

Archivists are appointed on an annual (AN) year basis with salaries paid
in twelve monthly installments on the last working day of each month.
However, the University\'s basic appointment commitment is to an
academic year (9-month) appointment. An annual appointment is justified
by the mission of the unit and the specific assigned duties and
responsibilities. In the event that either the unit\'s mission changes
and/or the specific duties and responsibilities of the position are
modified so that an annual appointment is not appropriate, the
appointment status will revert to an academic year appointment.\
\
[Back to the Archivist
Handbook](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/archivist-handbook/index.html)
:::

[Â©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/archivist-handbook/cont-app-system_definition.pcf)
