---
title: '3.3. Discipline and Dismissal for Cause'
---

::: {#body}
Archivist Handbook

**3.3. Discipline and Dismissal for Cause**

An archivist appointed in the Continuous Appointment System may be
dismissed prior to the expiration of a probationary appointment or
during a continuous appointment, for serious personal or professional
misconduct, including, but not limited to, (1) intellectual dishonesty;
(2) acts of discrimination, including harassment, prohibited by law or
University policy; (3) acts of moral turpitude substantially related to
the fitness of archivists to engage in teaching, research,
service/outreach and/or administration; (4) theft or misuse of
University property; (5) incompetence;(6) refusal or failure to perform
reasonable assigned duties; (7) use of professional authority to exploit
others; (8) violation of University policy substantially related to
performance of faculty responsibilities; and (9) violation of law(s)
substantially related to the fitness of archivists to engage in
teaching, research, service/outreach and/or administration.

If dismissal proceedings are initiated against an archivist with
continuous appointment and result in a finding of cause, dismissal or
disciplinary action other than dismissal may be recommended and imposed.
Disciplinary action other than dismissal may include, but is not limited
to, verbal or written reprimand, mandatory training, restitution,
suspension with or without pay, reassignment of duties, temporary or
permanent reduction in appointment, denial of salary increase, mandatory
counseling, and/or monitoring of behavior and performance.

Dismissal of archivists in the continuous appointment system shall use
procedures consistent with the policy on [Discipline and Dismissal of
Tenured Faculty for
Cause](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/tenure_discipline_dismissal.html).\
\
[Back to the Archivist
Handbook](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/archivist-handbook/index.html)
:::

[Â©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/archivist-handbook/discipline_dismissal.pcf)
