---
title: Optional Benefits
---

::: {#body}
Support Staff

**Optional Benefits**

Participation in the following benefits is optional:

-   Accidental Death and Dismemberment Insurance
-   Dental Coverage
-   Employee-Paid Life Insurance
-   Flexible Spending Accounts
-   Health care coverage
-   Health Plan Waiver
-   Long Term Care Insurance
-   Retirement

Eligible employees may enroll online using the Enterprise Business
Systems (EBS) portal. If enrollment is not made within 30 days, newly
hired employees must wait until the annual open enrollment period.

**Accidental Death and Dismemberment Insurance (AD&D)**

Eligible employees may voluntarily purchase AD&D coverage. This plan
provides various amounts of coverage for accidental death or
dismemberment or loss of sight whether in the course of business or
pleasure. Optional family coverage is also offered. The cost of the plan
varies according to the plan selected and is deducted from the
employee's paycheck. For more information regarding Accidental Death and
Dismemberment including eligibility criteria,
click [here](https://hr.msu.edu/benefits/life-insurance/index.html "Accidental Death and Dismemberment").

**Dental Plan**

MSU offers dental coverage to eligible employees. Depending on the
percent of employment, a monthly employee contribution may be required.
If applicable, premiums will be payroll deducted. More information
regarding dental plans including eligibility criteria, click
[here](https://hr.msu.edu/benefits/dental/index.html "Dental Plans").

**Employee-Paid Life Insurance**

Eligible employees may voluntarily purchase employee-paid life insurance
coverage. This plan provides various amounts of coverage for the
employee. Optional family coverage is also offered. The cost of the plan
varies according to the plan selected and is deducted from the
employee's paycheck. More information about Employee-Paid Life
Insurance including eligibility criteria, click
[here](https://hr.msu.edu/benefits/life-insurance/index.html "Life Insurance").

**Flexible Spending Accounts**

Flexible Spending Accounts provide a tax-free reimbursement to employees
for health care and dependent care expenses not reimbursed by any other
insurance or reimbursement program.

**Dependent Care Flexible Spending Account (Dependent Care FSA)**

Dependent Care FSA provides employees the opportunity to pay for
dependent care expenses for a child, disabled spouse, or dependent
parent on a pretax basis. An example of an eligible expense is the cost
of care provided in or outside of the home for a qualified dependent.
Eligible expenses must be incurred for a qualifying dependent and
expenses must be work related.

The employee may contribute up to \$5,000 per household through payroll
deduction. For additional information and eligibility criteria, please
visit the Flexible Spending
Accounts [website](https://www.hr.msu.edu/benefits/flexible-spending-accounts/index.html "Flexible Spending Accounts").

**Health Flexible Spending Account (Health FSA)**

Health FSA provides employees the opportunity to pay for medically
related expenses that are not reimbursed by an insurance plan on a
pretax basis. The amount contributed and the amount reimbursed from the
Health FSA are income tax-free. Examples of eligible expenses are
physician office and prescription drug copays, deductibles, eyeglasses,
contact lenses, and orthodontics.

Employees may contribute up to \$5,000 per household through payroll
deduction. For additional information and eligibility information,
please visit the Flexible Spending Accounts
[website](https://www.hr.msu.edu/benefits/flexible-spending-accounts/index.html "Flexible Spending Accounts").

**Health Care Coverage**

MSU offers health coverage, including prescription coverage, to eligible
employees. Depending on the percent of employment, a monthly employee
contribution may be required. If applicable, premiums will be payroll
deducted.

To be covered by an MSU health plan, spouses or Other Eligible
Individuals of MSU employees who have access to coverage elsewhere must
purchase single coverage through their own employer if the annual
premium contribution toward that coverage is \$850 or less.

For specific plan information, including information regarding
applicable co-payments, deductibles, benefit maximums and exclusions, as
well as eligibility criteria, click
[here](https://www.hr.msu.edu/benefits/healthcare/index.html "Healthcare").

**Health Plan Waiver**

Eligible employees who have adequate health plan coverage through
another employer may waive MSU's health care coverage and receive up to
a \$600 payment. The payment is considered taxable income and the normal
waiver period is July 1 through June 30, with payment to be received the
following July. The waiver payment is not an option if an employee and a
spouse or Other Eligible Individual are both employed at MSU. For
more information regarding Health Plan Waiver including eligibility
criteria, click
[here](https://www.hr.msu.edu/benefits/healthcare/waiver.html "Health Waiver").

**Long-Term Care Insurance**

The Michigan State University Long-Term Care Insurance plan,
administered by John Hancock, can help provide protection against the
high costs of long-term care that can result from the effects of aging,
illness, or a serious accident. This plan is available to eligible (the
employee must work 50% or more with a nine-month appointment or longer)
faculty, academic staff, executive management, support staff, retirees
and their eligible spouses/Other Eligible Individuals, parents,
parents-in-law, grandparents, grandparents-in-law, adult children and
siblings. Premiums will be payroll deducted. For more information
regarding Long-Term Care Insurance including eligibility criteria, click
[here](https://www.transamerica.com/individual/products/insurance/long-term-care/ "Long-Term Care").

**Retirement Plans**

MSU provides two different retirement plans: the MSU 403(b) Retirement
Plan and the MSU 457(b) Deferred Compensation Plan.

**MSU 403(b) Retirement Plan**

Michigan State University sponsors a tax-deferred defined contribution
plan operated under section 403(b) of the Internal Revenue Code. The MSU
403(b) Retirement Plan consists of two different programs: the MSU
403(b) Base Retirement Program (BRP) and the MSU 403(b) Supplemental
Retirement Program (SRP).

**MSU 403(b) Base Retirement Program (BRP)**

**Eligibility:** Participation is dependent upon length of service and
is mandatory for many employees, based on the collective bargaining
agreements. For more information on eligibility and other details,
please contact [MSU Human
Resources](/benefits/retirement "Retirement") at 517-353-4434,
800-353-4434 or <solutionscenter@hr.msu.edu>.

**Coverage:** Upon termination or retirement, the program can provide an
income based on the total amount accumulated from the employee's and the
University's contributions, and the earnings on those accounts.

**Cost:** For eligible employees, the MSU 403(b) Base Retirement Program
consists of a 5 percent contribution from the employee's base
wage/salary and a University contribution of 10 percent of base
wage/salary. For more information regarding the Base Retirement Program,
click
[here](https://www.hr.msu.edu/benefits/retirement/403b-base.html "Base Retirement").

**MSU 403(b) Supplemental Retirement Program (SRP)**

Generally, all MSU employees may contribute to the 403(b) Supplemental
Retirement Program (SPR), and is funded entirely by employee
contributions. Even if you are not eligible for the Base Retirement
Program, you can still participate in the Supplemental Retirement
Program. For more information regarding the Supplemental Retirement
Program,
click [here](https://www.hr.msu.edu/benefits/retirement/403b-supp.html "Supplemental Retirement Program"),
or contact MSU Human Resources at 517-353-4434, 800-353-4434
or <solutionscenter@hr.msu.edu>.

**MSU 457(b) Deferred Compensation Plan (DCP)**

Michigan State University also sponsors a voluntary, tax-deferred 457(b)
Deferred Compensation Plan (DCP). The amount that can be contributed is
completely separate from the amounts contributed to the MSU 403(b)
Retirement Plan. For more information, visit the
retirement [website](https://www.hr.msu.edu/benefits/retirement/457-def.html "Deferred Retirement Plan") or
contact MSU HR at 517-353-4434, 800-353-4434
or <solutionscenter@hr.msu.edu>.
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/support-staff/support-staff-handbook/ss-handbook/employee-benefits/optional_benefits.pcf)
