---
title: 'II\. Organization - Academic Council'
---

::: {#body}
Faculty Handbook

**Academic Council**

::: {xmlns=""}
**II. ORGANIZATION**\
\
The University Council is composed of the members of Faculty Senate,
selected pursuant to section 3.3.1. of the Bylaws for Academic
Governance, the Appointed Council, all faculty serving as Chairpersons
of College Advisory Committees, the Chairperson of the Athletic Council,
members of the Associated Students of Michigan State University (ASMSU)
selected pursuant to section 3.2.3.1., members of the Council of
Graduate Students (COGS) selected pursuant to section 3.2.3.2.,
Chairpersons of University-level Standing Committees, The Steering
Committee, the President, the Provost, and designated ex officio members
in 3.2.1.2.
:::

The functions of the University Council are to consider and act upon all
matters brought before the group by the Steering Committee, the
president, and the provost, and to provide a forum for the dissemination
of information and exchange of views regarding University policy.
Consultation upon matters related to the general welfare of the
University is provided by the University Council. The president, or in
the president\'s absence, the provost, presides at meetings of
the University Council. The Secretary for Academic Governance is the
secretary of the University Council. The University Council must meet at
least once each month during the academic year and more often at the
call of the president or Steering Committee. The agenda is prepared by
the Steering Committee, in consultation with the president or the
provost.

Most of the issues debated by the University Council are considered by
its various standing committees: The University-level Committees on
Academic Governance, Student Affairs, Undergraduate Education and
Graduate Studies. For information about composition, procedures and
functions of the various standing committees see Section 4 of the Bylaws
for Academic Governance. Faculty and student members of the
University-level standing committees are selected in accordance with the
procedures specified in the Bylaws for Academic Governance.

Bylaws are an integral component of the governance system adopted in
each academic unit. These documents describe faculty consultation and
advisement in the units and normally describe reappointment, tenure and
promotion procedures.\
\
[Back to Faculty
Handbook](https://hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/2Section-Organization.html "Organization")
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/academic_council.pcf)
