---
title: Annual Performance Review for Fixed Term Faculty and Academic Staff
---

::: {#body}
Faculty Handbook

**Annual Performance Review for Fixed Term Faculty and Academic Staff**

 Last updated: 3/1/2011

 **IV. Academic Human Resources Policies\
** *\
This policy was issued by the Office of the Provost on March 1, 2011 (to
be effective Fall semester 2011); it reflects advice by the Faculty
Council and the University Committee on Faculty Affairs*

### **Policy Statement** ^1^ {#policy-statement1 xmlns=""}

All units must have procedures for annual written evaluation of all
fixed term faculty and academic staff to support the annual merit
process and to provide a basis for a clear statement of performance
expectations and accomplishments. It is recognized that provisions and
practices in units may vary; however, all evaluation procedures must
incorporate, at the minimum, the principles included in this policy and
must be applied consistently to all fixed term faculty and academic
staff within the unit.

#### **I. Principles** {#i.-principles xmlns=""}

The purposes of the annual performance evaluation of fixed term faculty
and academic staff are to:

-   Ensure that each individual has a clear understanding of what is
    expected of her/him in his/her appointment;
-   Assess individual performance against expectations;
-   Provide an opportunity for fixed term faculty and academic staff to
    provide input to unit administrators about their performance;
-   Provide a basis for making decisions on merit pay; and
-   Provide input for decisions about future appointments.

While some variation may occur in the approach, the following principles
as implemented by unit procedures are to be followed by unit
administrators (i.e., Deans, Chairpersons and Directors) and fixed term
faculty and academic staff. In the case of fixed term faculty and
academic staff with joint appointments, a lead unit administrator shall
be designated. The process should be clearly defined by the bylaws or
established personnel policies and procedures of each academic unit.

A. Each fixed term faculty member and fixed term academic staff member
shall be evaluated on an annual basis and informed in writing of the
results of his/her evaluation by the unit administrator.

B. Each unit shall have clearly formulated and relevant written
performance criteria and shall provide these at the time of appointment,
and subsequently as necessary, to all fixed term faculty and academic
staff to clarify expectations.

C. Fixed term faculty and academic staff shall be informed of all
factors used for evaluation, the evaluation of their performance on each
of these factors and the relationship between their performance and
decisions on merit salary adjustments and, if appropriate, on
reappointment and promotion. Fixed term faculty and fixed term academic
staff are entitled to have all their assigned duties given weight in the
evaluation.

D. These annual assessments of fixed term faculty and academic staff
shall be reflected in recommendations to the Provost\'s Office regarding
additional appointments, reappointment, and/or promotion.

#### **II. Guidelines for Unit Consideration in Implementation** {#ii.-guidelines-for-unit-consideration-in-implementation xmlns=""}

A. Units should initiate the annual evaluation process early enough so
that the full process, including feedback to fixed term faculty members
and fixed term academic staff members, may be completed within three
months after the end of the appointment period.

B. Each fixed term faculty member and fixed term academic staff member
shall submit a written summary of activities for the appropriate period
of time to the unit administrator in a timely manner prior to the
evaluation. As appropriate, these materials will be shared with the peer
review committee in accordance with unit bylaws and procedures.

C. If unit bylaws or procedures provide for performance evaluation by
peer review committees, unit administrators shall rely on the advice of
this designated group, in addition to their own judgment.

D. The unit administrator, or designee, shall offer to discuss the
evaluation with the fixed term faculty/academic staff member. A draft of
the written evaluation shall be given to the faculty/academic staff
member prior to this discussion.

E. Unit administrators or their designees, no later than 3 months after
completion of the evaluation, shall provide to the fixed term faculty
member or academic staff member a final written evaluation of her/his
overall performance.

F. If, after receiving the final written evaluation, the fixed term
faculty or academic staff member disagrees with its content or chooses
to provide additional documentation or commentary, the faculty or
academic staff member shall have an opportunity to respond to the
evaluation. Any additional written faculty/academic staff comment and/or
documentation which is submitted within one month of receipt of the
final written evaluation shall be added to the evaluation file.

G. The full documentation for this written evaluation, including the
faculty/academic staff member\'s response, shall be placed in the
individual\'s unit personnel file.

H. Meetings between fixed term faculty and academic staff members and
unit administrators are encouraged prior to the written summary to
provide feedback about expectations and evaluation. Each fixed term
faculty/academic staff member shall have the right to meet in person
with the unit administrator or designee after the final written
evaluation is received.

I. For those appointed to one-time fixed term appointments, an
evaluation must still be completed, and a copy retained by the unit.

[Model Unit Performance Evaluation
Policy/Procedure](/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/model_performance_evaluation.html "Model Unit Performance Evaluation Policy/Procedure")

[Fixed Term Faculty and Academic Staff Annual Performance Evaluation
Form](/ua/performance/faculty-academic-staff/documents/Fixed-Term-Fac-Acad-Staff-Annual-Performance-Review-Form.doc "Annual Performance Review for Fixed Term Faculty and Academic Staff  Form") (MS
Word Document)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 ^[]{#HP_faculty}1^Health Programs (HP) faculty are not included in this
policy. The [Health Programs Faculty Appointment System
Handbook](/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/health-programs-faculty-handbook "HP Faculty Handbook") details
the policies and processes for annual reviews of HP faculty.\
\
[Back to Faculty
Handbook](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/4Section-HR-Policies.html)\
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/annual_review.pcf)
