---
title: |
    Faculty Career Advancement and Professional Development: A Special
    Affirmative Action Responsibility
---

::: {#body}
Faculty Handbook

**Faculty Career Advancement and Professional Development: A Special
Affirmative Action Responsibility**

 Last updated: 8/1/1996

**IV. ACADEMIC HUMAN RESOURCES POLICIES *(Cont.)***

*The following advisory statement was issued by the Office of the
Provost on October 5, 1982 and revised on August 1, 1996.*

University policy requires that each non-tenured faculty member in the
tenure system be \"evaluated and informed annually of his/her progress\"
(see statement on [Non-Tenured Faculty in the Tenure System, *Faculty
Handbook* ](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/non-tenured_faculty.html "Non-tenured faculty")).
Such annual reviews are to provide opportunities for two-way
communication regarding academic unit performance expectations and, if
necessary, to provide suggestions and reasonable assistance for
improving performance. Faculty career advancement and professional
development are to be encouraged.

Under the University\'s affirmative action policy, unit academic
administrators have a special responsibility to encourage the career
advancement and professional development of all women and racial
minority faculty members appointed in the tenure system, especially
non-tenured faculty. A supportive environment should be created in each
academic unit to maximize the opportunity for success of these
individuals in meeting both their career goals and the unit\'s
performance standards for merit salary increases, reappointment,
promotion and tenure. An important aspect of this environment is regular
and supportive interaction with colleagues in the unit and in related
fields in other units. Efforts of women and racial minority faculty
members to overcome barriers related to gender and/or race can divert
attention from the achievement of basic career goals and diminish the
quality of professional experience.

Department and school administrators should give special attention to
and encourage the professional development of their units\' women/racial
minority faculty members. Special attention is drawn to the importance
of the role of annual performance reviews and/or special meetings with
women and racial minority faculty to evaluate progress, to encourage
professional development, and to ensure two-way communication. Among
other things, performance reviews and/or special meetings are:

1.  To encourage opportunities as appropriate for membership in informal
    and formal research groups, teaching, research, and service program
    activities, assignment of graduate students and research assistants,
    committee assignments, and other critical activities in the unit.
2.  To discuss professional objectives and their relationship to the
    individual\'s distribution of effort among assigned duties.
3.  To discuss any issues and concerns that may be perceived as barriers
    to effective performance and full participation in the unit

Deans should ensure that unit administrators conduct annual performance
reviews of each non-tenured faculty member appointed in the tenure
system and that, among the topics addressed, those stated above, as
appropriate, are included in these reviews. If college or unit practice
is to require written annual evaluations, the dean should receive a copy
of the evaluation sent to each faculty member. The dean should conduct
in-depth reviews with each chairperson or director of the annual
performance evaluations of each non-tenured faculty member appointed in
the tenure system to identify issues and to implement appropriate steps
to assist the faculty member in achieving success in the unit.

In addition to the chairpersons and directors, deans also are encouraged
to schedule individual meetings at least annually with all racial
minority and women\--if underrepresented\--tenure system faculty members
appointed in their colleges. Issues identified in these meetings should
be discussed with the applicable chairperson/director so that each
individual can have full opportunity to develop professionally and make
progress toward meeting unit standards.

Documentation of the occurrence of annual performance reviews of
non-tenured faculty in the tenure system by unit administrators must be
submitted by each dean to the Office of the Provost along with the
reappointment, promotion and tenure recommendation list. The details of
each performance review will be discussed in the meetings with each dean
by the Associate Provost and Associate Vice President for Academic Human
Resources and the Vice President for Research and Graduate Studies.\
\
[Back to Faculty
Handbook](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/4Section-HR-Policies.html)
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/CareerAdv_ProfDevelopment.pcf)
