---
title: 'Conflicts of Interest, Faculty/Academic Staff'
---

::: {#body}
Faculty Handbook

**Conflicts of Interest, Faculty/Academic Staff**

 Last updated: 4/13/2012

**VI. RESEARCH AND CREATIVE ENDEAVOR\
**\
*This policy was approved by the Board of Trustees on April 13, 2006 and
revised on April 13, 2012.*

### I. PREAMBLE {#i.-preamble xmlns=""}

As a modern research-intensive land-grant university, Michigan State
University is committed to maintaining the trust of the general public
which supports it and which it serves. For the University to do so, its
faculty must pursue their research, teaching, outreach, and service
responsibilities with integrity and proper professional judgment in a
manner consistent with the highest standards of their respective
disciplines and in the best interests of the University. A faculty
member's reputation for integrity and for exercising proper professional
judgment can be seriously compromised, however, if the faculty member
fails to disclose a significant financial interest that is related to
his/her institutional responsibilities. Moreover, an individual faculty
member's unmanaged and unresolved conflict of interest can undermine
confidence in the University and, thus, harm its standing and that of
its entire faculty.

This Policy addresses the disclosure, review, management, and resolution
of conflicts of interest relating to the performance by faculty of their
research, teaching, outreach, and service responsibilities at the
University. For purposes of this Policy, a "conflict of interest" exists
when a faculty member's financial interests or other opportunities for
tangible personal benefit may compromise, or reasonably appear to
compromise, the independence of judgment with which the faculty member
performs his/her responsibilities at the University.^\[1\]^

### II. APPLICABILITY^\[2\]^ {#ii.-applicability2 xmlns=""}

This Policy applies to individuals appointed through the academic
personnel system with research, teaching, outreach, or service
institutional responsibilities. This Policy also applies to other
individuals who have independent responsibility for proposing,
conducting, or reporting the results of University research and other
sponsored projects.^\[3\]^

### III. IMPLEMENTATION {#iii.-implementation xmlns=""}

A. Disclosure

Faculty members must annually disclose all significant financial
interests^\[4\]^ and other opportunities for tangible personal benefit
that are related to the faculty member's institutional responsibilities.
Faculty members must also submit an updated disclosure within thirty
days of acquiring any new significant financial interest or other
opportunity for tangible personal benefit. "Institutional
responsibilities" refer to the faculty member's professional
responsibilities on behalf of the University, which include research,
teaching/education, outreach, and service activities, both within and
outside the University, in the general area of expertise for which the
faculty member is employed by the University.

Disclosures will be made in accordance with the procedure established by
the Faculty Conflict of Interest Officer (FCOIO). Each faculty members
shall provide all information necessary for the University to review,
manage, and resolve any conflicts of interest involving that faculty
member.

The University shall respect the confidentiality of private financial
and other private information supplied by faculty, and shall not release
this information publicly unless it is legally required to do so, the
resolution or elimination of the conflict of interest requires public
disclosure of the information, or the faculty member consents to its
public disclosure.

B.  Faculty Conflict of Interest Officer

The Vice President for Research and Graduate Studies (VPRGS), in
consultation with representatives of the University Committee on
Graduate Studies (UCGS) and the University Committee on Faculty Affairs
(UCFA), will appoint a FCOIO to administer this Policy. The FCOIO shall
serve as a resource to faculty and administrators on defining and
addressing faculty conflicts of interest and shall convene and
serve, *ex officio*, as a non-voting member of the Conflict Review
Committee described in Section III.D of this Policy.

The FCOIO shall develop and maintain an institutional procedure for
faculty members to report significant financial interests and other
opportunities for tangible personal benefit, as required by this Policy.

The FCOIO, in consultation with relevant administrators and appropriate
academic governance committees, shall arrange for the preparation of a
handbook for faculty, incorporating a list of frequently asked
questions, explaining and interpreting this Policy. Assessment,
management, and resolution of conflicts of interest should take into
account the different norms, customs, and expectations of the various
disciplines found among faculty in the University.

C.  College-Specific Addenda

Each college (or relevant non-college unit) is encouraged to prepare, in
consultation with the FCOIO, a supplement to the conflict of interest
handbook, with frequently asked questions, that addresses conflict of
interest issues specific to the disciplines and activities of the
faculty of that college. A college may also adopt its own addendum to
this Policy to address specific conflict situations which occur in that
college. Such addenda must be prepared in consultation with the FCOIO
and approved by the VPRGS. College-specific addenda must be consistent
with, and no less stringent than, the provisions of this Policy and
federal law and regulations regarding conflict of interest.

D.  Conflict Review Committee

The VPRGS, in consultation with representatives of the UCGS and the
UCFA, shall appoint a Conflict Review Committee (CRC) composed of at
least five faculty members from different disciplines, one of whom they
will select as chairperson. At the discretion of the VPRGS, additional
members may be appointed to the CRC. CRC members shall serve for
staggered three-year terms and may be reappointed to additional terms.
The FCOIO shall convene the CRC and serve, *ex officio*, as a non-voting
member. The FCOIO and CRC have the authority to invite any input they
deem necessary to assess a potential conflict of interest.

The FCOIO shall make the initial assessment about the existence of a
conflict of interest based on the extent to which a disclosed
significant financial interest or opportunity for tangible personal
benefit could reasonably be expected to affect, or be perceived to
affect, a faculty member's performance of a University responsibility.
If the FCOIO determines that a disclosed interest may create a real or
potential conflict of interest, the FCOIO shall forward the disclosure
to the CRC for additional assessment. If the CRC determines that no
conflict of interest exists, it shall inform the faculty member and the
VPRGS of that determination in writing. If the CRC determines that a
conflict of interest exists as a result of the disclosures made by the
faculty member, or as a result of a report made by another party, the
CRC shall develop a written plan for the resolution or management of the
conflict of interest. The CRC may consult with the faculty member, the
faculty member's unit administrators,^\[5\]^ the FCOIO, and appropriate
representatives of the central administration in developing a plan.\
\
The FCOIO shall submit the plan to the faculty member and the faculty
member's unit administrators for review and comment. If the faculty
member does not agree with the CRC's plan for the management or
resolution of the conflict of interest, the faculty member may file a
written objection detailing the nature of his/her objections with the
VPRGS within ten days of receiving notice of the CRC's plan. The CRC's
plan, along with any written comments submitted by unit administrators,
and the objections of the faculty member shall be submitted to the
VPRGS. The VPRGS may accept the CRC's plan or decide to implement an
alternative plan for the management or resolution of the conflict of
interest. The VPRGS shall issue his/her decision within thirty days of
his/her receipt of the CRC's plan and any supplemental
material.^\[6\] ^The VPRGS shall report his/her decision to the CRC,
faculty member, unit administrators, and FCOIO.\
\
In devising the plan to address the conflict of interest, the CRC shall
seek to employ the least intrusive management techniques that will
suffice to resolve the ethical and legal concerns arising from the
conflict.          

The CRC may recommend to the Provost and VPRGS the issuance of specific
guidelines to investigators and other faculty regarding common conflict
situations.

### IV.  SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR RESEARCH AND PROJECTS FUNDED BY THE PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE AND NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION {#iv.-specific-requirements-for-research-and-projects-funded-by-the-public-health-service-and-national-science-foundation xmlns=""}

The Public Health Service (PHS) and National Science Foundation (NSF)
have developed policies and procedures to ensure that the design,
conduct, and reporting of research funded under PHS or NSF grants,
cooperative agreements, and contracts will not be biased by conflicts of
interest affecting the investigators responsible for such research.

The PHS/NSF regulations require that each institution and investigator
applying for, receiving, or being supported by PHS/NSF funds be
compliant with PHS/NSF rules regarding training and disclosure prior to
applying for funds and the establishment of conflict of interest
management plans prior to the expenditure of funds.

Investigators applying to PHS or NSF must disclose to the University all
"significant financial interests" (as defined in the regulations)
related to the investigator's institutional responsibilities. Further,
investigators participating in PHS- or NSF-funded research are required
to submit an updated disclosure of significant financial interests
within thirty days of acquiring any new significant financial interest.

A conflict of interest exists if the University determines that the
investigator has a significant financial interest that could directly
and significantly affect the design, conduct, or reporting of PHS- or
NSF-funded research. The University will not authorize the expenditure
of any funds under a PHS- or NSF-funded research project until (a) all
investigator disclosures have been reviewed for potential conflicts of
interest; and (b) if a conflict of interest exists, a plan satisfactory
to the VPRGS to manage the conflict of interest has been developed and
implemented.

To the extent that these or any other legal requirements are more
stringent than this Policy, they will take precedence. For a detailed
description of the disclosure requirements applicable to PHS/NSF
investigators, refer to the "Guidelines on Conflict of Interest
Pertaining to Applications for NSF and PHS Research Support," which is a
supplement to this Policy.

### V. NON-COMPLIANCE {#v.-non-compliance xmlns=""}

A faculty member who violates this Policy is subject to disciplinary
action. Any University employee or student who knowingly files a false
allegation that this Policy has been violated, or who knowingly provides
false information to or intentionally misleads University officials who
are investigating an alleged violation of this Policy, may be subject to
disciplinary action. The VPRGS shall establish a mechanism, after
consulting with the FCOIO, for investigating concerns or allegations
regarding significant financial interests and other opportunities for
tangible personal benefit of faculty which are not reported as required
under this Policy. The review and investigation of concerns or
allegations that this Policy has been violated will be conducted
confidentially to the extent permitted by law, except insofar as
information needs to be disclosed so that the University may effectively
investigate the matter or take corrective action.

If the failure of a faculty member to comply with this Policy has biased
the design, conduct, or reporting of funded research, the University
may, and in some cases is required to, notify the awarding agency of the
compliance failure and the corrective action taken by the University.

### VI. TIMING OF IMPLEMENTATION {#vi.-timing-of-implementation xmlns=""}

The current Faculty Conflicts of Interest Policy was approved by the
Board of Trustees on April 13, 2006. This revised Faculty Conflicts of
Interest Policy shall supersede the current Policy upon approval by the
Board of Trustees.

Effective August 24, 2012, all individuals who have independent
responsibility for proposing, conducting, or reporting the results of
University PHS- or NSF-funded research must be in compliance with this
Policy and related University policies and guidelines applicable to PHS-
or NSF-funded research.

The President, in consultation with the VPRGS, shall determine the
timing of implementation of the annual reporting requirement under
Section III, Part A of this Policy for covered individuals to whom the
foregoing paragraph does not apply. Such individuals shall comply with
the disclosure requirements set forth in the Faculty Conflicts of
Interest Policy approved by the Board of Trustees on April 13, 2006
until the President has determined that the disclosure requirements set
forth in this revised Policy are applicable to them, which shall be no
later than January 1, 2015. 

[(See Frequently Asked
Questions)](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/coi-faq.html "Conflict of Interest FAQ")

::: {xmlns=""}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\

<div>

 \[1\] In amplification and not in limitation of the foregoing, a
conflict of interest exists if a faculty member's financial interests
(or other opportunities for tangible personal benefit) directly and
significantly affect the design, conduct, or reporting of the results of
research or other sponsored projects.

</div>

<div>

\[2\] For purposes of this Policy, the individuals described in Section
II (Applicability) will generally be referred to as "Faculty" or
"Faculty Members," although the term encompasses, and the Policy applies
to, all individuals described in Section II.

</div>

<div>

\[3\] For a more detailed description of this Policy's application to
individuals involved in University research and other sponsored
projects, refer to the Faculty Conflict of Interest Handbook.

</div>

<div>

\[4\] A "significant financial interest" is defined in the Faculty
Conflict of Interest Handbook.

</div>

<div>

\[5\] For purposes of this Policy, references to a faculty member's
"unit administrators" include the relevant department chair, dean,
and/or separately reporting director.

</div>
:::

::: {xmlns=""}
\[6\] This thirty-day period may be extended by the FCOIO upon the
written request of the VPRGS.
:::

::: {xmlns=""}

------------------------------------------------------------------------
:::

::: {xmlns=""}
\
**Appendix: Role, Appointment, and Evaluation of the Faculty Conflict of
Interest Officer (FCOIO)**

1.  Role of the FCOIO\
    \
    A. Serves as an information resource to faculty and administrators
    on defining and addressing conflicts of interest, as defined in the
    Policy.\
    \
    B. Prepares an institutional procedure to be used in establishing
    conflict reporting mechanisms.\
    \
    C. Convenes the Conflict Review Committee (CRC) and serves, *ex
    officio*, as a non-voting member.\
    \
    D. In consultation with relevant administrators and appropriate
    faculty committees, arranges preparation of a handbook incorporating
    a list of frequently asked questions explaining and interpreting the
    Policy.\
    \
2.  Appointment of the FCOIO\
    \
    A. The FCOIO shall be appointed by the Vice President for Research
    and Graduate Studies (VPRGS) after consultation with representatives
    of the University Committee on Graduate Studies (UCGS) and
    University Committee on Faculty Affairs (UCFA). The FCOIO shall
    serve at the pleasure of the VPRGS.\
    \
    B. The FCOIO shall report to the VPRGS. The FCOIO shall keep the
    Provost and President informed about the implementation of this
    Policy and about educational and other activities of his/her
    office.\
    \
    C. Should the FCOIO recuse himself/herself from FCOIO duties with
    regard to a particular conflict of interest, the VPRGS shall appoint
    a substitute after consultation with the chairperson of the Academic
    Subcommittee of the UCGS.\
    \
3.  Evaluation of FCOIO\
    \
    The VPRGS shall evaluate the performance of the FCOIO at intervals
    not to exceed five years pursuant to criteria established by the
    President, Provost, and VPRGS in consultation with the UCGS. The
    VPRGS shall submit the results of this evaluation to the President,
    the Provost, and the UCGS.

\
[Back to Faculty
Handbook](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/4Section-HR-Policies.html)
:::
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/conflicts_of_interest.pcf)
