---
title: Drugs and Alcohol
---

::: {#body}
Faculty Handbook

**Drugs and Alcohol**

 Last updated: 10/12/1990

**III. UNIVERSITY POLICIES (*Cont.*)**

*The following policy was approved by the Board of Trustees on October
12, 1990.*

Consistent with state and federal law, Michigan State University will
maintain a workplace free from the unlawful manufacture, distribution,
dispensation, possession or use of a controlled substance.^1^ **^ ^**
The unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensation, possession or use
of controlled substances, illicit drugs and alcohol are prohibited on
any property under the control of and governed by the Board of Trustees
of Michigan State University, and at any site where work is performed by
individuals on behalf of Michigan State University.

Pursuant to applicable University procedures governing employee
discipline, any employee involved in the unlawful use, sale,
manufacturing, dispensing or possession of controlled substances,
illicit drugs and alcohol on University premises or work sites, or
working under the influence of such substances, will be subject to
disciplinary action up to and including dismissal and referral for
prosecution.

The employee must notify the University of any criminal drug statute
conviction for a violation occurring in the workplace no later than five
(5) calendar days after such conviction. Failure to provide such notice
will subject the employee to discipline up to and including dismissal
pursuant to applicable University procedures governing employee
discipline. The employee shall notify his/her immediate supervisor, who
will report the incident to the Office of Human Resources, Academic
Human Resources or Student Employment Office.

Michigan State University supports and sponsors programs aimed at the
prevention of substance abuse by University employees. The Employee
Assistance Program provides preventative programs and counseling for
employees experiencing substance-dependency problems. Assistance is
available on a voluntary basis. Leaves of absence to obtain treatment
may be obtained under the medical leave provision of the appropriate
labor contract or policy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

::: {xmlns=""}
**Footnote:**
:::

**^1 ^** Five schedules of controlled substances are defined in the
comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970, 21. U.S.C.
812.\
\
[Back to Faculty
Handbook](https://hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/3Section-University-Policies.html)
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/drugs_alcohol.pcf)
