---
title: |
    Faculty Status: Reserved for Appointments in Primary Academic Units of
    the University / Joint Appointment
---

::: {#body}
Faculty Handbook

**Faculty Status: Reserved for Appointments in Primary Academic Units of
the University / Joint Appointment**

 Last updated: 1/11/1980

**IV. ACADEMIC HUMAN RESOURCES POLICIES *(Cont.)***

*This policy was issued by the Office of the Provost with an effective
date of January 11, 1980.*

The academic quality of MSU and the integrity of the tenure system are
determined fundamentally by decisions for appointment to faculty ranks.
These objectives are served best by limiting appointments to faculty
status to the primary academic units of the University, i.e., academic
departments, schools and colleges.

The Office of the Provost will endorse appointment recommendations to
appoint individuals on a fixed-term basis (with ending date) with the
rank of instructor, assistant professor, associate professor, and
professor only in instances in which the primary recommending unit is an
academic department (a department in a college or colleges) and/or a
school and/or a college. All appointments in the tenure system, except
those subject to the stipulations indicated below, must be recommended
by an academic department, or a school in a college, or a residential or
other non-departmentally organized college as the primary academic unit,
or by such units jointly.

**Tenure System Appointments: Primary Academic Units and Other Types Of
Units**

When a primary academic unit, i.e., a department, school, and/or
residential or other non-departmentally organized college, joins with
any other type of unit in the University to recommend appointment of an
individual in the tenure system, the primary academic unit commits to
accept the individual as a regular faculty member. The academic unit
should make this commitment only after direct involvement in the
recruitment of the individual and specification of the unit\'s role in
evaluations for salary increases, reappointment, tenure, promotion, and
leave recommendations. In all cases, except as designated below,
responsibility and final decision for salary increases, promotion,
reappointment, tenure and leave eligibility rests with the designated
primary academic unit. **^1 ^** This commitment means that the
individual will serve as a regular faculty member in the academic unit
if there is a determination at any future date by the Provost after
consultation with the appropriate vice president, as applicable, that
the best interests of the University will be served by discontinuation
of the assignment of the individual in the non-academic unit(s). A
faculty member may also initiate a request to return to the academic
unit. Notice of one year to the Provost from the faculty member will
usually be sufficient time to reassign the individual to the sponsoring
primary academic unit, i.e., department, school, or residential or other
non-departmentally organized college.

The reassignment of an individual to a department, school, or
residential or other non-departmentally organized college will not
constitute an addition to the authorized FTE count except as may be
necessary during a transition period. Transition periods will be
extended only as necessary by the Provost\'s assessment of the resources
available. As soon as the Provost determines that resources are
available, the individual will be included in the academic unit\'s
regular FTE count. Thus, before this type of commitment is made, overall
department, school, or college priorities must be considered carefully,
including both short-term and long-term plans. The number of such
commitments should be limited.

Any individual with a multiple appointment of this type holds status in
the tenure system as a member of the primary academic unit, i.e.,
department, school, or residential or other non-departmentally organized
college; and the academic unit is obligated to honor this status fully
if and when called upon to do so by the Provost or the faculty member.
Consequently, departments, schools, and colleges must be centrally
involved in the ways specified above in recommendations on appointment,
salary increases, reappointment, tenure, promotion and leaves.

**Tenure System Appointments: Between Primary Academic Units**

The policy stated in the previous paragraphs does not apply to
recommendations for joint appointments **between** primary academic
units, i.e., departments, schools, and residential or other
non-departmentally organized colleges. Recommendations for joint
appointments**between** primary academic units for new or currently
appointed faculty should include the MSU Multiple Appointment Memorandum
which identifies the primary unit with responsibility and final decision
for salary increases, promotion, reappointment, tenure and leave
eligibility.

As specified by the Multiple Appointment Memorandum, all units,
including the primary unit, participate in discussions and reach
agreement about the initial appointment recommendation and have the
opportunity to provide an evaluation of the faculty member concerning
salary increases, promotion, reappointment, tenure and leave
eligibility, although the primary unit has the final responsibility for
such actions. Although, with the agreement of the relevant chairpersons
(directors), deans, and the Provost, such assignments may be changed,
multiple appointment assignments are viewed as stable and on-going
unless made for a specific period as recorded on the academic personnel
form at the time the joint appointment is approved. Unlike joint
appointments between primary academic units and other types of units,
the individual faculty member does not have the option of unilaterally
electing to cease performing specified duties in any of the primary
academic units party to the original (or amended) joint (multiple)
appointment agreement. At the conclusion of joint appointments between
primary academic units for specified time periods, the individual
faculty member\'s assignment reverts to the unit(s) specified in the
original or amended Multiple Appointment Memorandum.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

::: {xmlns=""}
**Footnote:**
:::

**^1 ^** Such understandings, together with the other required
information, should be included in or attached to Michigan State
University\'s Multiple Appointment Memorandum. In instances where the
other type of unit provides more than 50 percent salary support, any one
of these personnel actions may be designated as the responsibility of
this unit. However, such arrangements (a) require the concurrence of the
academic unit, (b) should be specified in the Multiple Appointment
Memorandum, (c) may be changed at the initiative of the academic unit
after consultation with the faculty member, and (d) do not affect the
individual\'s status as a regular faculty member in the academic unit.\
\
[Back to Faculty
Handbook](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/4Section-HR-Policies.html)
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/faculty_status.pcf)
