---
title: Granting Tenure
---

::: {#body}
Faculty Handbook

**Granting Tenure**

 Last updated: 4/24/2009

**IV. ACADEMIC HUMAN RESOURCES POLICIES *(Cont.)***

*The following policy was approved by the Board of Trustees on May 15,
1952 and amended on June 11, 1993 and on April 24, 2009.*

The Board of Trustees in approving this statement of tenure policy does
so in good faith with the intent to comply fully with it. It must,
however, reserve the right to deviate from these terms if conditions
beyond its control, such as abrupt declines in enrollment, drastic loss
of income or conditions that result in the drastic curtailment or
abandonment of programs or activities, make it necessary to do so.

**Preamble**: The purpose of tenure is to assure the University staff
academic freedom and security and to protect the best interests of the
University. Tenure shall not be considered to protect any person from
the loss of his/her position as a result of misconduct which constitutes
cause for dismissal as specified in the [Discipline and Dismissal of
Tenured Faculty for Cause
policy.](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/tenure_discipline_dismissal.html "Dismissal for cause")

------------------------------------------------------------------------

::: {xmlns=""}
**GRANTING TENURE**
:::

Appointments in the tenure system are only at the ranks of professor,
associate professor, and assistant professor.

The chairperson of the unit recommending an appointment in the tenure
system shall deliver in writing to the faculty member at the time of
appointment a copy of the bylaws of the unit or other policy document
that specifies the unit\'s expectations and procedures for
reappointment, promotion and tenure. (See section on [Non-Tenured
Faculty in the Tenure
System](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/non-tenured_faculty.html "Non-tenured faculty").)

Recommendations for tenure system faculty appointments, reappointments,
promotion and tenure originate in the primary academic unit (department,
school or non-departmentally organized college) and are reviewed
successively by the Dean, the Provost and are approved by the President.
Actions involving the award of tenure are approved by the President, who
makes the final recommendation to the Board of Trustees for action. When
tenure is granted, it is effective upon the first day of the month after
the date of approval by the Board of Trustees.

A faculty member with the rank of *professor* in the tenure system is
granted tenure (appointment for an indefinite period without a terminal
date) from the date of appointment at that rank.

An *associate professor* ^1 ^who has not served previously at Michigan
State University usually is appointed in the tenure system for a
probationary period of four years. In some cases, upon the
recommendation of the unit administrator(s), dean(s), and with the prior
approval of the Provost and President, the probationary period may vary
in length from two to five years. If an *associate professor* is
reappointed, tenure is granted. Individuals appointed at the rank
of *associate professor* without tenure have the option of requesting
reappointment at any point^2 ^prior to the conclusion of the stipulated
probationary appointment period. A negative decision on such a request
shall not preclude consideration for reappointment at the time specified
upon appointment.

In unusual cases, on recommendation of the unit administrator(s) and
dean(s) and with the prior approval of the Provost and the President,
and final approval by the Board of Trustees, a faculty member initially
appointed at the rank of *associate professor* may be granted tenure
from the date of appointment.

An *assistant professor* ^1 ^who has not served previously at Michigan
State University is appointed initially in the tenure system for a
probationary period of four years and may be reappointed for an
additional probationary period of three years. If at any time during
these two probationary periods an *assistant professor* is promoted to
the rank of *associate professor*, tenure is granted. If not promoted to
the rank of associate professor at the conclusion of the second
probationary period of three years, the individual is ineligible for an
additional reappointment unless a special extension is approved (see
below).  Individuals appointed at the rank of *assistant
professor* without tenure have the option of requesting promotion to
associate professor with tenure at any point^2 ^prior to the conclusion
of the stipulated probationary appointment period. A negative decision
on such a request shall not preclude consideration for reappointment at
the normal time.

Extensions in the probationary appointment periods for all faculty
appointed in the tenure system require approval of the
Chairperson/Director, the Dean, the Provost (or designee) and the
University Committee on Faculty Tenure^3 ^Extensions in probationary
appointment periods are not interpretations of or deviations from the
rules of tenure under section 4.8.5. of the *Bylaws for Academic
Governance*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

::: {xmlns=""}
**Footnotes:**
:::

^1 ^Consistent with the Committee on Institutional Cooperation (Big Ten)
and other peer law school policies/practices, the Law College has
slightly different lengths for tenure system probationary appointment
periods than those described above.  An assistant professor may be
promoted to the rank of associate professor without tenure after three
years of college tenure system employment.  An assistant or associate
professor must apply for tenure at the latest after completion of ten
regular semesters or five years of service at the Law College.  A
candidate with significant tenure system law teaching experience or
exceptional public or private professional experience may be appointed
as an associate professor without tenure.  In unusual circumstances, an
initial appointment may be made at the rank of associate professor with
tenure.  An appointment at the rank of full professor confers tenure
upon appointment.  See the Law College\'s Policy for the Granting of
Tenure and Promotion.

^2^ Such early reviews would occur on the normal review cycle as
established by university, college and department/school procedures.

^3 ^Information on extensions of probationary appointments should
originate in the primary academic unit; such information may also be
obtained from the chairperson of the University Committee on Faculty
Tenure, the department chairperson, the school director, the dean, or
the Office of the Provost. See section on [Extending the
Reappointment/Promotion/Tenure Review
Timeline.](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/tenure_timeline_extension.html "Extending the Reappointment/Promotion/Tenure Review Timeline.")\
\
[Back to Faculty
Handbook](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/4Section-HR-Policies.html)
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/granting_tenure.pcf)
