---
title: Internal Research Funding
---

::: {#body}
Faculty Handbook

**Internal Research Funding**

**VI. RESEARCH AND CREATIVE ENDEAVOR *(Cont.)***

The Strategic Partnership Grant (SPG) program supports larger projects
that are aimed at establishing long-term centers of excellence on the
campus. Funding under this program generally requires that the project
be multidisciplinary, that it be in an area of high priority for the
units involved, and that it have a high probability of attracting
external support for a sustained period of time. The funding limit for
this program is \$400,000 total for projects up to three years in
duration.

The Humanities and Arts Research Program (HARP) provides two types of
internal funds to support faculty who are conducting important research,
creative and performance projects and activities in the arts and
humanities. The limited funding is designed to 1) support faculty for
projects that seem likely to enhance the reputation of the faculty
member and the university where external support is not generally
available, and 2) support projects that will be using the funds to seek
extramural funding.

The Scholarship Development portion of HARP makes awards for research,
creative, and performance projects of the kind that will help faculty
achieve their career milestones of reappointment, tenure, promotion, and
annual merit evaluation. The funding limit for this program is \$25,000.

The Scholarship Production portion of HARP is a subvention program whose
purpose is to help subsidize the costs of book publication, permissions
to use copyrighted materials, CD recording and production, the creation
of mounting of exhibits and other expenses associated with producing the
results of a completed research or creative project. The funding limit
for this program is \$7,000.

The Discretionary Funding Initiative (DFI) supports faculty who require
funds to bridge grants or complete additional studies needed for the
resubmission of a grant application. The submission of applications to
the DFI program is a two step process. Faculty will be required to
submit a request to their Research Associate Dean, and applications
supported by the college will then be recommended to the Office of the
Vice President for Research and Graduate Studies. The maximum DFI award
from the OVPRGS is \$50K, and there is an additional requirement of a
20% match to be provided by the unit or college. It should be noted
that, although the recommendation of the College will be one of the
primary criteria for the decision on funding DFI project, not all
projects recommended will necessarily be funded.  Faculty should refer
to the [Council of Research Deans (CORD)
website](http://www.cord.msu.edu/ "Cord web site") (www.cord.msu.edu)
for the list of Research Associate Deans. Each college has developed
their own process for submitting and reviewing applications at the
college level.

The Targeted Support Grant for Technology Development (TSGTD) provides
funding for the enhancement, optimization and/or other development of
selected technologies that have commercial potential as identified by
MSUT Management and Technology Managers. These grants will accelerate
the process of transforming promising technologies into products that
are responsive to market demand, and should increase the commercial
value of technologies and enable MSU to retain a greater share of
ownership. The amount of funds awarded and the duration of the award
varies. MSUT Tech Managers are responsible for identifying and
nominating all TSGTD projects.

University-level programs administered outside the Office of the Vice
President for Research and Graduate Studies include the [Michigan
Applied Policy Research
Funds](http://www.ippsr.msu.edu/AppliedResearch/AboutAPPR.htm "About APPR") (administered
by the Institute for Public Policy and Social Research; see
http://www.ippsr.msu.edu/AppliedResearch/AboutAPPR.htm) and the [Pearl
J. Aldrich Endowment in Aging-Related
Research ](http://www.pearlaldrich.com/home "Aging Related Research web site ")(see:
http://www.pearlaldrich.com/home).\
\
[Back to Faculty
Handbook](https://hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/6Section-Research.html)
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/internal_research_funding.pcf)
