---
title: Librarian Continuous Appointment System
---

::: {#body}
Faculty Handbook

**Librarian Continuous Appointment System**

 Last updated: 4/13/2012

**IV. ACADEMIC HUMAN RESOURCES POLICIES\
\
** *The following policy was approved by the Board of Trustees on June
25, 1977 and revised on June 12, 1987, September 3, 2003 and April 13,
2012.*

Appointments in the continuous appointment system are only at the ranks
of Librarian III, Librarian II, and Librarian I.

The Provost of Michigan State University, in recognition of the
essential contributions of librarians to academic programs, appoints,
upon recommendation of the Director of Libraries, librarians at those
professional levels (*Librarian I-II*) which do not involve an immediate
award of continuous appointment status. The President approves, upon
recommendation of the Director of Libraries and the Provost,
appointments of librarians at the professional level (*Librarian III*)
which confer immediate continuous appointment status to those librarians
who exhibit strong evidence of the capacity for sustained professional
growth.

Continuous appointment, as used in this statement, assures a librarian
that she/he will not be dismissed due to capricious action by the
Library administration nor will dismissal be used as a restraint on a
librarian\'s exercise of academic freedom. Continuous appointment does
not guarantee employment if positions are not funded, if there are gross
violations of University or Library policies, if the librarian refuses
to perform reasonable assigned duties or fails to fulfill contractual
obligations, or if the librarian no longer renders satisfactory
performance in his or her professional capacity at the University.

Dismissal of librarians in the continuous appointment system shall use
procedures consistent with the policy on Dismissal of Tenured Faculty
for Cause.

Probationary appointment periods are calculated from August 16 of the
calendar year in which the appointment is effective.

When continuous appointment is granted, it is effective upon the first
day of the month after the date of approval.

A librarian with the rank of *Librarian III *in the continuous
appointment system is granted continuous appointment (appointment for an
indefinite period without a terminal date) from the date of appointment
at that rank.

A *Librarian II *who has not served previously at Michigan State
University usually is appointed in the continuous appointment system for
a probationary period that expires on the fourth August 15 after the
appointment year. In some cases, upon the recommendation of the Director
of Libraries, and with the prior approval of the Provost, the
probationary period may vary in length from two to five years. If
a*Librarian II* is reappointed, continuous appointment is granted.
Individuals appointed at the rank of *Librarian II* without continuous
appointment have the option of requesting reappointment at any
point^1^  prior to the conclusion of the stipulated probationary
appointment period. A negative decision on such a request shall not
preclude consideration for reappointment at the time specified upon
appointment.

In unusual cases, on recommendation of the Director of Libraries and
with the prior approval of the Provost and the President, a librarian
initially appointed at the rank of *Librarian II* may be granted
continuous appointment from the date of appointment.

A *Librarian I *who has not served previously at Michigan State
University is appointed initially in the continuous appointment system
for a probationary period that expires on the fourth August 15 after the
appointment year and may be reappointed for an additional probationary
period of three years. If at any time during these two probationary
periods a *Librarian I* is promoted to the rank of *Librarian II*,
continuous appointment is granted. If not promoted to the rank of
Librarian II at the conclusion of the second probationary period of
three years, the individual is ineligible for an additional
reappointment unless a special extension is approved (see below). 
Individuals appointed at the rank of *Librarian I* without continuous
appointment have the option of requesting promotion to Librarian II with
continuous appointment at any point^1^ prior to the conclusion of the
stipulated probationary appointment period. A negative decision on such
a request shall not preclude consideration for reappointment at the
normal time.

Extensions in the probationary appointment periods for all librarians
appointed in the continuous appointment system require approval of the
Director of Libraries and the Provost (or designee).

Procedures for the implementation of this policy are available in the
Office of the Library.

**Evaluation**

All librarians are evaluated annually for the purposes of improving
performance and service to the Library and the University, for
continuing appointment status, and for compensation. The evaluation is
made by the immediate supervisor, including consultation with the
evaluated librarian.

The Library department administrators, in consultation with the
supervisors and peer review committees, make personnel recommendations
to the Director on such matters as salaries, hiring procedures, and
continuous appointment.

The Director, based upon advice received and considering the total
personnel needs of the Library, will make a final recommendation to the
Provost on personnel matters.

The evaluative and consultative processes are detailed in the Librarian
Personnel Handbook.** \
**

**Operating Principles**

The operating principles for continuous appointment of librarians are
included in the Library Bylaws.

**Footnote**

^1^ Such early reviews would occur on the normal review cycle as
established by university and Library procedures.\
\
[Back to Faculty
Handbook](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/4Section-HR-Policies.html)
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/librarian_appointment.pcf)
