---
title: 'II\. Organization - The Faculty'
---

::: {#body}
Faculty Handbook

**The Faculty**

::: {xmlns=""}
**II. ORGANIZATION**\
\
The faculty of the University is defined in the Bylaws of Academic
Governance section 1.1.1 as follows:
:::

*The \"regular faculty\" shall consist of all persons appointed under
the rules of tenure and holding the rank of professor, associate
professor or assistant professor and all persons appointed as
librarians.*

*The \"fixed term faculty\" shall consist of all persons holding the
rank of professor, associate professor, assistant professor, or
instructor, but not appointed under the rules of tenure.*

*The \"Health professions faculty\" shall consist of all faculty
appointed in the Health Programs Faculty Appointment System who hold the
rank of professor, associate professor, or assistant professor in the
Colleges of Human Medicine, Nursing, Osteopathic Medicine, or Veterinary
Medicine.*

*The \"Facility for Rare Isotope Beams/National Superconducting
Cyclotron Laboratory (FRIB/NSCL) faculty\" shall consist of all faculty
appointed in the FRIB/NSCL Faculty Appointment System holding the rank
of professor, associate professor, or assistant professor.*

*The \"honorary faculty\" shall consist of visiting professors and
professors emeritus.*

The faculty of the University is organized into units \-- most commonly
departments but also schools, institutes, etc. Each department and unit
is attached organizationally to at least one college; however,
organizational attachment of units to two or more colleges is very
common at MSU. The faculty of each college and unit has jurisdiction
over its own internal academic affairs within University policy. Each
college has an elective Advisory Council and each unit has an advisory
committee. \"Regular\" faculty members holding appointments with the
academic rank of professor, associate professor or assistant professor
constitute the voting faculty on internal matters in both the college
and the department, and internal voting rights may be extended by unit
bylaws to include fixed term faculty, health professions faculty, NSCL
faculty, honorary faculty, specialists, lecturers, research associates,
assistant instructors or adjunct faculty. Non-college faculty also
participate in the governance system with a similar set of rights and
responsibilities.\
\
[Back to Faculty
Handbook](https://hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/2Section-Organization.html "Organization")
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/organization_faculty.pcf)
