---
title: Patents
---

::: {#body}
Faculty Handbook

**Patents**

 Last updated: 2/14/2001

**VI. RESEARCH AND CREATIVE ENDEAVOR (*Cont.*)**

::: {xmlns=""}
This policy was approved by the Board of Trustees on November 15, 1930
and revised on February 14, 2001.
:::

Consistent with its public service mission and with regulations
governing federally-funded research, the University endeavors to foster
the development of its inventions and discoveries through patenting and 
licensing to industry.  A patent provides an incentive for a company to
license an invention from the University and to invest in developing and
marketing products based on the invention.  Licensing proceeds provide a
means for the University to recognize and reward the creative research
efforts of inventors and to support additional University research.

Any discovery or invention which a) results from research carried on by,
or under the direction of, any employee of the University which is
supported by University funds or by funds controlled or administered by
the University, or b) results from an employee\'s duties with the
University, or c) has been developed in whole or in part through the
utilization of University resources or facilities not available to the
general public shall belong to the University (\"University
Inventions\").

In order to assist the University in protecting University Inventions,
University employees and students (including postdoctoral appointees,
graduate and undergraduate students) shall disclose any University
Inventions to the University prior to disclosing such discoveries or
inventions through publications, presentations, or communications with
third parties (including research sponsors) in a manner which may
inhibit or preclude the University from obtaining patent protection. 
Such disclosure may also be required to comply with legal and/or
contractual obligations owed to governmental or non-governmental
research sponsors.  University faculty shall not disclose University
Inventions in the course of performing Outside Work for Pay unless and
until the University has had the opportunity to take the steps necessary
to protect University Inventions through patent or otherwise.

The University\'s goal is to manage University Inventions in such a
manner as to produce the greatest benefit to the University and to the
public. The University may, but is not obligated to, seek to protect any
University Inventions by patent or otherwise.  After receiving
disclosure of a University Invention, the University may elect to assign
title to the University Invention to the inventor(s).

::: {xmlns=""}
The University will recover all direct expenses incurred for the
patenting, protection and licensing of each University Invention from
its licensing proceeds before distributing the net proceeds remaining
among the inventor(s), the inventor\'s major administrative unit, and
the University according to the following schedule: 
:::

 

  ---------------------------------- ----------------- ---------------------- ----------------
  **Net Licensing Proceeds **\       \                 **Major **\            \
  **on a Particular University **\   **Inventor(s)**   **Administrative** \   **University**
  **Invention**                                        **Unit**               

  First \$5,000                      100%              0                      0

  Next \$100,000                     33 1/3%           33 1/3%                33 1/3%

  Next \$400,000                     30%               30%                    40%

  Next \$500,000                     20%               20%                    60%

  All Additional Net  \              15%               15%                    70%
  Licensing Proceeds  \                                                       
  over \$1,005,000                                                            
  ---------------------------------- ----------------- ---------------------- ----------------

 

The President shall be responsible for administering this policy and
managing University Inventions, including technological know-how that
may be licensable but may not be patented or patentable.  The President
has delegated this authority under this policy to the Vice President for
Research and Graduate Studies.  The President may authorize exceptions
to this policy that she/he determines to be in the best interest of the
University.

Particular University Inventions or licensing proceeds may be
transferred to the Michigan State University Foundation for
administration consistent with the net licensing proceeds distribution
table above.\
\
[Back to Faculty
Handbook](https://hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/6Section-Research.html)
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/patents.pcf)
