---
title: Benefits for Postdoctoral Fellows
---

::: {#body}
Faculty Handbook

**Benefits for Postdoctoral Fellows**

 Last updated: 9/1/1983

::: {xmlns=""}
**VII. FACULTY AND ACADEMIC STAFF BENEFIT AND RETIREMENT PROGRAMS
(*Cont.*)**
:::

**OPTIONAL BENEFITS (*Cont.*)**

*This policy was issued by the Office of the Provost and the Office of
the Vice President for Research and Graduate Studies with an effective
date of September 1, 1983.*

Upon official appointment, postdoctoral fellows will be issued an
appropriate identification card that will qualify them for such benefits
as library privileges, staff parking, and staff rates at University
cultural and athletic events.

Postdoctoral fellows who are not otherwise covered on another policy
(e.g., as a spouse or a dependent) are required to have individual
health plan coverage. Postdoctoral fellows are not eligible for
University contribution toward benefits but will, if appointed for at
least nine months, qualify for one of the University\'s health plans
under the provisions stipulated below.

The following health plans are available to postdoctoral fellows: Blue
Cross Blue Shield of Michigan Community Blue PPO or Blue Care Network
(BCN-HMO). Information about these plan options can be obtained from MSU
Human Resources. Funds for a postdoctoral fellow\'s individual health
plan premiums can be provided as follows:

Institutional Grants: Health plan coverage contributions are to come
from the grant budget, normally an allowance, for grants provided by
Michigan State University as well as by external agencies. The
department should request funds from the external granting agency for
this purpose. If using funds for health plan coverage is contrary to the
granting agency\'s policy, then contributions for such coverage will
come from the department or from funds that may be made available in the
Office of the Vice President for Research and Graduate Studies. In the
latter case, approval must be obtained from that office prior to
accepting the individual for postdoctoral study.

Individual Grants: If a cost-of-education allowance to the University
accompanies the grant, the contributions will come from the portion of
that allowance allocated to the department or college. That allocation
will be increased, if necessary, to cover such contributions. If a
cost-of-education allowance is not provided from the granting agency,
contributions will come from the department or from funds that may be
made available in the Office of the Vice President for Research and
Graduate Studies.

In the latter case, approval must be obtained from that office prior to
accepting the individual for postdoctoral study.

Family health plan coverage is not an appropriate charge on postdoctoral
grants; however, a postdoctoral fellow may elect personally to pay the
differential between individual and family options. Exceptions are
permitted in cases where a sponsor allows costs associated with family
health coverage as part of the postdoctoral award. In such an instance,
the allowable family health coverage costs must be included in the award
for the postdoctoral fellows who have families and who are eligible for
family health coverage at Michigan State University.

Arrangements should be made with MSU Human Resources for payment of
health plan premiums either by individual payment or by arrangements to
charge these costs to an appropriate account.\
\
[Back to Faculty
Handbook](https://hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/7Section-Benefits.html)
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/postdoctoral_benefits.pcf)
