---
title: Religious Observance
---

::: {#body}
Faculty Handbook

**Religious Observance**

::: {xmlns=""}
**V. INSTRUCTION *(Cont.)***
:::

It has always been the policy of the University to permit students and
faculty/academic staff to observe those holidays set aside by their
chosen religious faith.

Faculty/academic staff should be sensitive to the observance of these
holidays so that students who absent themselves from classes on these
days are not seriously disadvantaged.  It is the responsibility of those
students who wish to be absent to make arrangements in advance with
their instructors.  It is also the responsibility of those faculty who
wish to be absent to make arrangements in advance with their
chairpersons/directors, who shall assume the responsibility for covering
their classes.

As Michigan State University has become increasingly multicultural, the
incidence of conflicts between mandatory academic requirements and
religious observances has increased.  In the absence of a simple and
dignified way to determine the validity of individual claims, the claim
of a religious conflict should be accepted at face value.  Be aware that
some degrees of observance may have a more extensive period of
observance.  Instructors may expect a reasonable limit to the number of
requests by any one student.  Some instructors attempt to cover all
reasons for student absences from required academic events such as
quizzes or exams with a blanket policy, e.g., allowing the student to
drop one grade or two quizzes without penalty.  If this is meant to
extend to religious observances, the instructor should state this
clearly at the beginning of the term.  If instructors require make-up
exams, they retain the right to determine the content of the exams and
the conditions of administration, giving due consideration to equitable
treatment.\
\
[Back to Faculty
Handbook](https://hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/5Section-Instruction.html)
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/religious_observance.pcf)
