---
title: Research Faculty Appointment Category
---

::: {#body}
Faculty Handbook

**Research Faculty Appointment Category**

 Last updated: 2/28/2012

**IV. ACADEMIC HUMAN RESOURCES POLICIES (*Cont.*)\
**\
* [Complete document in
PDF](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/documents/ResearchFacultyApptCategory.pdf)\
\
Approved by UCFA, March 29, 2011 and Faculty Senate, February 28, 2012*

**PREAMBLE:** The research faculty appointment category is established
to meet the needs of a research intensive, land grant university in the
recruitment and retention of individuals who support the research
mission of the University. Research faculty appointments are consistent
with the University\'s need to retain the flexibility to adjust its
programs to meet the changing needs of the modern research University.

Research faculty are appointed on a fixed term basis, i.e., with an end
date; they are not eligible for tenure. Research faculty are supported
by sponsored projects or other non-appropriated University funds. The
appointment is contingent on the availability of funding and cannot
extend beyond the period of availability of supporting funds (see
section on bridge funding).

**RANKS**: Research faculty are appointed at the rank of research
assistant professor, research associate professor or research professor
in an academic department, school and/or college.

**DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:** Research faculty may serve as principal
investigators or project directors on research awards and are expected
to seek independent external funding in areas related to the research
mission and goals of the academic unit(s). Research faculty may not be
assigned regular teaching responsibilities and may not participate in
the governance of the University or of an academic unit. In rare cases
where a research faculty member is considered for a teaching (or other
non-research) assignment, the effort of the research faculty appointment
must be reduced accordingly so that the research appointment is not
funding the teaching appointment. Similarly, effort related to proposal
writing may not be funded by external sources.

**TERMS OF APPOINTMENT:** Research faculty are recruited and appointed
on a fixed term basis through the academic hiring procedures.

The initial appointment for a research assistant professor is normally
for three years, but may range from one to three years. The initial
appointment for research associate professors and research professors is
for five years. In all cases, the length of the appointment is based on
the external funding and may not exceed the end date of the external
support. Research faculty may be appointed on an annual (AN) or academic
year (AY) basis. Appointments are normally full time, with a minimum of
5% of effort supported by the general fund in order to allow time for
proposal writing. Consistent with the Fixed Term Appointment policy,
research faculty appointments may be eliminated for budgetary reasons
prior to the ending date of the current appointment with a 30 day
written notice.

**PERFORMANCE REVIEW**: Research faculty are expected to meet the
research standards for comparably ranked tenure system faculty. Units
must establish procedures for the review of research faculty in
accordance with the principles in the policy on Annual Performance
Review for Fixed Term Faculty and Academic Staff.

Four months prior to the end date of the appointment, a reappointment
review must be conducted by the relevant academic unit that assesses the
effectiveness of the research faculty member in fulfilling the research
mission of the unit and in obtaining and sustaining external support.
The review should also include an evaluation of the academic unit\'s
research goals and the likely role of the research faculty member in
achieving these goals in the future.

The purpose of this review is to determine whether to recommend an
additional appointment, or not to reappoint. The research faculty member
must be informed in writing of her/his appointment status 90 days prior
to the appointment end date.

**REAPPOINTMENT:** Reappointment is at the discretion of the appointing
unit, college, and Office of the Provost. Decisions not to reappoint may
be for failure to meet unit standards for competence or performance,
and/or changes in program needs or in economic circumstances, e.g., lack
of external funding support.  A research faculty member must be informed
in writing regarding reappointment 90 days prior to the appointment end
date.

Subject to the availability of external funding support, research
faculty may be reappointed for the following periods:

-   Research Assistant professor: up to 3 years;
-   Research associate professor: up to 5 years;
-   Research professor: up to five years.

**PROMOTION**: Research faculty may be promoted at any time in
accordance with the annual timetable for promotion recommendations.
Promotion to research associate professor or research professor requires
meeting unit standards and criteria, including the qualifications
specified below.

**QUALIFICATIONS FOR RESEARCH FACULTY RANKS** (Colleges, departments and
schools may have additional standards and criteria):

1.  Research assistant professor \
    1.  Terminal degree (or equivalent) appropriate to the field;
    2.  Evidence of productive scholarship, including external funding
        support;
    3.  Evidence of ability to fulfill relevant responsibilities in the
        research enterprise.
2.  Research associate professor \
    1.  Terminal degree (or its equivalent) appropriate to the field;
    2.  Record of productive scholarship, including evidence of
        sustained external research funding and salary support;
    3.  Fulfillment of important responsibilities in the research
        enterprise.
3.  Research professor
    1.  Terminal degree (or its equivalent) appropriate to the field;
    2.  Record of research excellence as in independent investigator,
        including an established record of continued research funding;
    3.  Unmistakable evidence of national or international recognition
        by peers.

**BRIDGE FUNDING:**Bridge funding may be available to provide salary and
benefit support for research faculty who experience a short term gap in
external (sponsored) funding due to factors beyond their control.
Eligibility for bridge funding is determined by the rank of the research
faculty member and the years of service in that rank at MSU, as
specified below

  --------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------
  **Rank (years of service)**                               **Funding Eligibility ** **(salary and benefits)**
                                                             
  **Research assistant professor**                           
  Less than 3 years of service                              Not eligible
  3-5 Years of service                                      Up to 2 months of salary and benefits
  **Research associate professor and Research professor**    
  Less than 3 years of service                              Up to 6 months of salary and benefits
  3 or more years of service                                Up to 12 months salary and benefits
  --------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------

The Office of the Vice President for Research and Graduate Studies
(VPRGS) administers a central bridging fund which covers 50% of the
total bridging costs. The appointing unit and/or college must provide
the other 50% of the cost. Bridge funding is not an entitlement;
approval by the VPRGS and Associate Provost for Academic Human Resources
is based on consideration of the following factors:

-   The quality and significance of the research faculty member\'s work;
-   The research faculty member\'s past experience in obtaining external
    support for her/his work;
-   The quality and significance of the research plan of the research
    faculty member;
-   The potential for the research faculty member to obtain external
    support in the future;
-   Evidence that the research faculty member has a grant application
    that is expected to be funded in the near future by an external
    agency, given the placement of the proposal(s) in the funding cycle;
-   Evidence that the research faculty member\'s work is in keeping with
    unit and institutional priorities;
-   A statement by the appointing unit regarding the research faculty
    member\'s continued employment.

Bridge funding requests are to be submitted by the appointing unit with
the above information, including the dollar support required and a
statement by the appointing unit that if the request is approved, it
will cover 50% of the cost of salary and benefits. The request must be
endorsed by the dean(s) with the final decision made jointly by the
VPRGS and the Associate Provost for Academic Human Resources.

**PAY and BENEFITS**: Research faculty are covered by the same salary
guidelines that apply to other non-union fixed term faculty. The
guidelines provide for pay adjustments (usually annual) based on merit.
Research faculty are covered by the same benefit programs applicable to
other non-union fixed term faculty and academic staff, e.g., health,
dental and prescription drug coverage, retirement plan, etc. Eligibility
for coverage under such programs is the same as for other non-union
fixed term faculty.

**TERMINATION AND DISCIPLINE**: Termination may occur during the term of
the contract for cause or for unforeseen changes in budgetary
circumstances.

Dismissal for cause during the appointment period may be the result of
serious personal or professional misconduct including, but not limited
to, (1) intellectual dishonesty; (2) acts of discrimination, including
harassment, prohibited by law or University policy; (3) acts of moral
turpitude substantially related to the fitness of faculty members to
engage in teaching, research, service/outreach and/or administration;
(4) theft or misuse of University property; (5) incompetence;^  ^(6)
refusal or failure to perform reasonable assigned duties; (7) use of
professional authority to exploit others; (8) violation of University
policy substantially related to performance of faculty responsibilities;
and (9) violation of law(s) substantially related to the fitness of
faculty members to engage in teaching, research, service/outreach and/or
administration.\
\
Prior to dismissal, the unit administrator shall confer with the dean
and the Associate Provost for Academic Human Resources and provide
written notice of the reason(s) for dismissal, projected date of
dismissal and an opportunity to respond.

Disciplinary action other than dismissal may be imposed after the unit
administrator has conferred with the dean and has provided the research
faculty member with written notice of the pending disciplinary action,
reason(s) for the disciplinary action, and an opportunity to respond.

Upon dismissal or other disciplinary action, the unit administrator
shall provide the research faculty member with written notice of the
right to file a grievance under the Faculty Grievance Policy. A research
faculty member dismissed for cause will be terminated no earlier than 30
days from the date of the termination notice.

Terminations may also be implemented during the appointment period for
budgetary reasons.   In such cases, the research faculty member will be
notified in writing of the effective date of termination at least thirty
days prior to the effective date of separation.

Research faculty are covered by the provisions of the Faculty
Grievance Policy.

**TRANSFER OF RESEARCH FACULTY TO OTHER APPOINTMENT CATEGORIES:** \
Research faculty are eligible to apply for tenure system or other
position openings in accordance with standard University appointment
policies and procedures.\
\
[Back to Faculty
Handbook](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/4Section-HR-Policies.html)
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/research_appointment.pcf)
