---
title: |
    Salary, Appointment, and Faculty Status of Faculty Members Who Assume
    Administrative Responsibilities - Faculty Handbook
---

::: {#body}
Faculty Handbook

**Salary, Appointment, and Faculty Status of Faculty Members Who Assume
Administrative Responsibilities - Faculty Handbook**

 Faculty Handbook

*This policy was issued by the Office of the Provost, after consultation
with the Council of Deans, the University Committee on Faculty Affairs
and the University Committee on Faculty Tenure, with an effective date
of January 1, 1982, and revised on November 11, 2015.\
*

The faculty member who accepts assignment as an administrator must be
informed of his/her status as a member of the faculty as distinct from
his/her status in the administrative position. There are five aspects of
faculty status which must be specified:

::: {xmlns="" style="text-align: left;"}
-   Academic Year (AY) or Annual Year (AN) appointment basis as a
    faculty member as distinct from appointment basis as an
    administrator.
-   Salary rate as a faculty member as distinct from salary rate as an
    administrator (including administrative increment, when applicable).
-   Primary academic unit (department(s), school(s), and/or residential
    or non-departmentally organized college(s)) membership as a faculty
    member indicating where regular faculty responsibilities normally
    would be performed in the event of return to regular faculty status.
-   Duties to be performed as a faculty member while on assignment as an
    administrator.
-   Reappointment, tenure and promotion(s) criteria and procedures for
    faculty members while on assignment as an administrator.
:::

This policy applies to faculty members who are recruited to accept
appointment both as a faculty member and an administrator and to faculty
members already at Michigan State University who accept an
administrative assignment.

All concerned must recognize that assignment as an administrator is
subject to change at any time and that at any time the faculty member
may return to regular faculty duties in his/her primary academic unit,
e.g., department(s), school(s), and/or residential or college(s) not
organized by  department.

**Appointment Basis**

An academic year appointment basis is the basic employment commitment to
individuals appointed in academic personnel system positions at Michigan
State University, and this is not changed by reason of an administrative
assignment. Rather, a change related to the administrative assignment,
i.e., AY to AN appointment basis, is for the period of service in the
administrative assignment only. (It is recognized that with Provost
approval, because of unit mission and needs and individual
responsibilities, some faculty members will be appointed to faculty
duties on an annual basis. For further information see policy entitled
\"Academic Personnel System Appointments: Basic Employment Commitment on
an Academic Year, Basis,\" [Faculty
Handbook](/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/index.html "Faculty Handbook")).

**Salary Rate**

An individual\'s salary rate as a faculty member is not changed by
reason of an administrative assignment. Rather, the change related to
the administrative assignment is for the period of the service in the
administrative assignment only. The salary rate as a faculty member
should be reviewed and specified explicitly each year even while the
faculty member holds an administrative assignment. The salary rate
related to an administrative assignment will reflect a change from AY to
AN basis, if this is relevant. Also, an administrative increment may be
added.

**Administrative Increment**

There is no fixed amount designated for the administrative increment. 
However, the administrative increment amount is typically no more than
\$20,000.  Administrative increments greater than \$20,000 require prior
approval by the Office of the Provost.  The amount of the administrative
increment is determined by the responsibility of the position and the
size, complexity and scope of the department, unit or program.  Given
the varying responsibilities across units, there may be considerable
variation between units.  The amount of the increment shall also be
based on the availability of funds.  When such administrative
responsibilities cease, the administrative increment will be removed.

**Status in Academic Unit**

Prior to appointment or assignment to administrative duties, the
applicable primary academic unit(s) must (initially or continue to)
accept the faculty member as a regular faculty member. Following
reassignment from administrative duties, the designated primary academic
unit(s) will honor this commitment by accepting the faculty member in
its \"normal\" FTE count except as may be necessary during a transition
period. Transition periods will be extended only as necessary by
agreement with the Office of the Provost after an assessment of the
resources available.

**Performance of Faculty Duties**

Faculty duties may be performed by the faculty member while serving in
an administrative capacity. These duties may include teaching, research
and public service in the relevant primary academic unit(s), i.e.,
department(s), school(s), and/or residential or non-departmentally
organized college(s). In addition, committee assignments, supervision of
graduate students, participation in academic governance, as consistent
with University, college, and unit bylaws, in or on behalf of the
academic unit may be involved. Subject to an explicit agreement between
the relevant University, college, and unit level administrators,
performance in such activities is to be evaluated in accordance with
normal unit procedures and should be an ingredient in the evaluation for
salary increases of the faculty member holding an administrative
assignment. In accordance with this explicit agreement, the University,
college and unit administrators shall resolve any differences concerning
the annual salary increase to be recommended for the individual in
question.

**Criteria and Procedures for Reappointment, Tenure and Promotion**

Performance in assigned faculty duties should be an ingredient in the
evaluation for reappointment, tenure and promotion of the faculty member
holding an administrative assignment.^1^

Evaluation of a faculty member assigned to both faculty and
administrative duties and responsibilities should take into account the
relative assignment of effort to these duties and responsibilities.
Evaluation of faculty and other primary academic unit duties in
consideration for the above-referenced academic personnel
recommendations must be conducted in accordance with normal unit
procedures and criteria.

Normally the primary academic unit will initiate the recommendation for
reappointment, tenure, and/or promotion (as appropriate) in accordance
with regular procedures. However, the appropriate administrator may also
initiate the recommendation. In such cases, the recommendation must be
reviewed and endorsed by the primary academic unit(s) in which the
individual holds academic rank. Such an endorsement indicates the
willingness of the unit to accept the individual as a faculty member in
the unit with the recommended tenure status and rank.

**Implementation of Policy**

All of these aspects of faculty status must be communicated by the
relevant unit administrator to the faculty member, in writing, before
initial appointment as a faculty member and administrator or prior to
the assignment of administrative duties to a faculty member already
employed at Michigan State University. A copy of the letter specifying
these aspects of faculty status, including how they will be affected, if
at all, by the cessation of administrative duties, must be attached to
the appointment or change of status form used to initiate the personnel
action.

As relevant, appointment or a change in status to an annual (AN)
appointment basis and the addition of an administrative increment by
reason of administrative assignment should be specified in the
\"comments\" section of the appointment or change of status forms as
follows:

\"The annual (AN) appointment basis is for the period of service in the
position of\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_only.
In addition, an administrative increment is provided in the amount
of\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_for the
period of appointment in this administrative role.\"

This language may be modified in the event that one or the other of
these changes is inappropriate in any particular case.\
A change to an administrative assignment requiring a change from an
academic year (AY) appointment to an annual (AN) appointment basis will
result in a salary that is 11/9 of the faculty member\'s academic year
(AY) salary. If an administrative increment is appropriate, it should be
added after the determination of the AN salary. If reassignment from
administrative duties results in a shift from an annual (AN) appointment
basis to an academic year (AY) appointment basis, the AY salary will be
an amount equivalent to 9/11 of the current AN salary except that if an
administrative increment exists, it should be deducted before the AN
salary is changed to an AY basis. In every case, a shift from an
administrative assignment to faculty duties shall result in withdrawal
of any administrative increment.

The salary rate as a faculty member should be specified explicitly each
year. The following statement should be communicated by the appropriate
administrator to each faculty member with an administrative assignment
on the occasion of annual salary increases:

\"Your salary effective October 1,\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ will
be\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. This includes an
administrative increment
of\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. Your salary rate on
an academic year basis, excluding this administrative increment,
is\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, effective October
1, \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.\"

This language may be modified if an annual year (AN) appointment basis
or the addition of an administrative increment is not required by reason
of administrative responsibilities.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Footnote:**

 

^[]{#footnote1}1^As a general matter, a non-tenured faculty member
should not be assigned to administrative duties except in instances when
this is in the best interest of the individual and the University. In
such cases, a written statement on how the unit\'s regular standards and
criteria for reappointment and tenure will be applied to the individual
during the period of administrative assignment must be prepared by the
applicable unit administrator, after consultation with the designated
unit advisory committee, and be sent to the affected faculty member
before the administrative assignment is approved. The annual review of
performance must include assessment of progress as a faculty member
performing regular faculty duties, i.e., instruction, research and
public service.\
\
[Back to Faculty
Handbook](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/4Section-HR-Policies.html)
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/SalaryAdminResp.pcf)
