---
title: 'Faculty Relationships with Student-Athletes'
---

::: {#body}
Faculty Handbook

**Faculty Relationships with Student Athletes**

 Last updated: 8/4/2003

::: {xmlns=""}
**V. INSTRUCTION *(Cont.)***
:::

*This statement was issued by the Office of the Provost on August 6,
1996 and revised on August 4, 2003.*

Michigan State University enrolls more than 700 student-athletes who
participate in 25 intercollegiate sports. MSU recognizes the special
responsibilities and privileges of these student-athletes. The
University is committed to provide the environment and support necessary
for student-athletes to establish and realize high levels of academic
and athletic success.

Student-athletes are governed by policies and regulations of the
National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) and the Big Ten
Conference as well as by Michigan State University. All of these
regulations are intended to establish shared restrictions and
expectations for all student-athletes while recognizing the special
burdens created by intercollegiate athletic competition.

The NCAA and Big Ten Conference regulations cover all aspects of
recruiting, academic eligibility, and athletic financial aid of
matriculated student-athletes. For faculty members, there are two
general guidelines that are important to remember:

::: {xmlns=""}
1.  You cannot do anything for a student-athlete that you would not do
    for another student in a similar situation. On the other hand, you
    should not refuse to do something for a student-athlete, if you
    would do it for another student.
2.  There are some things that you can do for an individual student that
    you cannot do for an individual student-athlete: for example, you
    cannot buy anything, not even a soft drink, for a student-athlete;
    you cannot provide a ride for a student-athlete; you cannot let a
    student-athlete charge a long distance telephone call to your
    business or home telephone number.

**Policy and Process Items**
:::

**ACADEMIC PROGRESS REPORTS: **These reports are sent electronically to
faculty members by the Office of the Registrar during the fifth and
eleventh weeks of Fall and Spring semesters.  If you are teaching a
course and receive the forms, please fill them out and respond as fully
as possible. The Student-Athlete Support Services Office is charged with
monitoring academic progress for student-athletes, and needs the
information in a timely way. If you have concerns about the academic
performance of a student-athlete, you can recommend academic assistance
for the student-athlete by calling the Director of Student-Athlete
Support Services.

**ACADEMIC ADVISING**: Counselors in the Department of Intercollegiate
Athletics do not provide academic advising. Student-athletes are advised
by advisors in their majors or in the University Undergraduate Division
(UUD) or by the assistant/associate dean of the college in which they
are enrolled and should be referred to these sources. However,
student-athletes can receive additional academic support from
Student-Athlete Support Services, e.g., assignment to a study hall,
availability of a tutor or referral to additional services provided on
campus.

**CLASS ATTENDANCE: **Student-athletes are excused from class when
competing in official events or games. Athletic Council recommended that
competition schedules be so constructed as to limit the number of missed
days to seven per semester. (This may not always be possible.) Each
student-athlete should bring a team schedule to the instructor at the
beginning of the semester to verify the excused absences. However, an
excused absence does not excuse the student-athlete from completing the
work assigned. \[Student-athletes are frequently advised to schedule
classes with mandatory attendance policies in the off-season or summer
term.\]

**ATHLETIC DEPARTMENT CONTACTS:** Coaches are not permitted to call
instructors or TAs assigned to courses. Student-Athlete Support Services
or the college or department or UUD academic advisor may appropriately
contact faculty members about a student-athlete\'s progress, attendance
or behavior. However, any undue attempt to influence your judgment or
secure a particular action on behalf of a student-athlete should be
reported immediately to your department chairperson.

**INCOMPLETES:** A student-athlete must make up incomplete coursework
and have the grade entered in the Student Information System
(SIS) before the first day of class in the next semester if the course
is necessary for academic eligibility. Authorized staff in departments
and colleges that offer the course enter the final grade in SIS. This
eligibility-related rule is more stringent for student-athletes than the
University rule is for all students and can be crucial for competition.

**PRIVACY OF RECORDS:** The Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act
(FERPA) prohibits dissemination of any information about a
student-athlete\'s academic progress to anyone but the student, the
student\'s advisor, and the Student-Athlete Support Services Office
unless the student-athlete grants permission for this information to be
shared.\
\
[Back to Faculty
Handbook](https://hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/5Section-Instruction.html)
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/student_athlete_relationships.pcf)
