---
title: 'MSU Teacher-Scholar Awards'
---

::: {#body}
Faculty Handbook

**MSU Teacher-Scholar Awards**

**IV. ACADEMIC HUMAN RESOURCES POLICIES *(Cont.)***

Teacher-Scholar Awards are made to six members of the tenure system
faculty from the ranks of assistant professor and associate professor
who early in their careers have earned the respect of students and
colleagues for their devotion to and skill in teaching. The essential
purpose of the award is to provide recognition to the best teachers who
have served at MSU for seven years or less, taking into consideration
that the most effective teachers will have their instruction intricately
linked to and informed by their research and creative
activities. Nominations are normally made by department
chairpersons/school directors after consultation with an appropriate
committee of colleagues.  No department/school may make more than two
nominations.  \"At large\" nominations are also invited from an
appropriate student organization.  All nominations are reviewed by a
college screening committee, which may forward the number of nominations
to the Office of the Provost as shown in the table below.

To be considered for an MSU Teacher-Scholar Award, a tenure system
faculty member must hold the rank of assistant professor or associate
professor and, at the beginning of the award period, must have served on
the faculty for at least two semesters but no more than seven academic
years at Michigan State University.  In addition, nominees must not have
more than ten years of employment experience of all kinds since receipt
of the terminal degree applicable to their discipline.  Years spent in
\"postdoc\" appointments will not be counted in determining
eligibility.  Nominees for a Teacher-Scholar Award must be willing to
permit a member of the awards committee to visit their classrooms.
Committee visitation is a part of the total evaluation procedure only
for those nominees who, after preliminary screening, seem most
promising. (MSU College of Law, Facility for Rare Isotope Beams/National
Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory \[FRIB/NSCL\] faculty and Health
Programs \[HP\] faculty are also eligible for nomination). 

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Number of Eligible Tenure System Assistant/Associate Professors in College**   **Maximum Number of Teacher-Scholar Nominations forwarded by the College**
  Less than 40                                                                     2
  40-45                                                                            3
  More than 45                                                                     4
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Additional information can be found
at <http://www.ahr.msu.edu/all-university-awards>.\
\
[Back to Faculty
Handbook](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/4Section-HR-Policies.html)
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/teacher-scholar_awards.pcf)
