---
title: |
    Receipt of Qualifying Degree as a Condition of Appointment in the Tenure
    System
---

::: {#body}
Faculty Handbook

**Receipt of Qualifying Degree as a Condition of Appointment in the
Tenure System**

 Last updated: 9/5/2012

**IV. ACADEMIC HUMAN RESOURCES POLICIES *(Cont.)***

*The following policy was issued by the Office of the Provost with an
effective date of September 1, 1980 and revised on September 5, 2012.*

Attainment of the appropriate terminal qualifying degree (Ph.D. or
other) will be required as a condition of appointment in the tenure
system (ranked faculty, instructor through professor) at Michigan State
University.

This policy is consistent with Michigan State University\'s on-going
quest to improve its status and quality as a major land-grant, AAU
University

As such, MSU is an institution which expects that its faculty make
significant and on going contributions to scholarship in their
respective disciplines. This policy on qualifying degrees advances
MSU\'s attainment of its mission because the receipt of the appropriate
terminal qualifying degree is a necessary prerequisite for faculty to
make such scholarly achievements. Unit criteria for reappointment,
promotion, and tenure must stress the importance of such scholarly
achievements. Continuing involvement in scholarly work and research
insures the continuing ability to provide highly competent instruction
and service which are general requirements of MSU faculty.

The Ph.D. and several other terminal qualifying degrees (Ed.D.; D. Ed.;
D.A.; D.B.A.; Doctor of Journalism; J.D.; M.D.; D.0.; M.S.W.; M.F.A.;
D.S.W.; D.M.A.; and D.V.M.), as appropriate to specific academic units,
are designated appropriate qualifying degrees applicable under this
policy. The application of the policy will operate on this assumption
unless colleges and separately reporting units identify other degrees
that should be accorded \"qualifying degree status.\" Justification will
be required in support of each such recommendation, and an agreement
that they should be recognized as \"appropriate qualifying degree\" must
be reached with the Office of the Provost.

This policy will not affect the status of individuals currently
appointed in the tenure system who have not as yet completed the
appropriate qualifying degree. However, the continued expectation for
such individuals is that the receipt of such a degree is a necessary but
not sufficient condition for the awarding of tenure. The earliest
possible completion of the degree is expected.

Individuals currently completing the requirements for the appropriate
qualifying degree may be employed at Michigan State University on a
temporary basis (appointment with an ending date) and, with a prior
agreement with the Office of the Provost, may be shifted to a tenure
system position after the qualifying degree has been completed. It is
strongly recommended that such individuals be employed on a temporary
basis no longer than two years.

Individuals to whom offers for tenure system appointments are made
before the appropriate terminal qualifying degree is completed should be
informed that a temporary appointment as an instructor will be required
if the terminal qualifying degree is not received by a specified date
prior to the effective date of appointment. On proof of receipt of the
degree and with agreement of the Office of the Provost, the
individual\'s status can be changed to that of an assistant professor in
the tenure system.

Exceptions to this policy can be made because of truly exceptional and
unique qualifications, market considerations, or other appropriate
reasons, but only with the prior written approval of the Office of the
Provost.\
\
[Back to Faculty
Handbook](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/4Section-HR-Policies.html)
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/tenure_condition_degree.pcf)
