---
title: 'Health Care Plan Benefits for Visiting Faculty/Scholars'
---

::: {#body}
Faculty Handbook

**Health Care Plan Benefits for Visiting Faculty/Scholars**

::: {xmlns=""}
**VII. FACULTY AND ACADEMIC STAFF BENEFIT AND RETIREMENT PROGRAMS
(*Cont.*)**
:::

**OPTIONAL BENEFITS (*Cont.*)^1^**

Visiting faculty/scholars may be eligible to enroll for individual
health plan coverage with Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan or Blue
Care Network (BCN-HMO). In addition, visiting scholars are also eligible
to enroll for health plan coverage with the Blue Care Network student
health plan. These health plan options may be available in recognition
of the fact that many visiting faculty/scholars are enrolled in national
or other private institutional health programs in the U.S.A. or abroad,
which do not provide them coverage when appointed at MSU. Individuals
eligible for this program are visiting faculty/scholars: 1) who are
appointed without pay or with pay on appointments of less than 50% time
and/or for less than nine months, who will return to their home
university, agency, firm or other institution after a limited
appointment period at Michigan State University; and 2) who are
currently enrolled in a health plan which is not available to them while
appointed at Michigan State University.

Information relating to the Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan or Blue
Care Network health plan options available to visiting faculty/scholars
may be found at
[https://hr.msu.edu/benefits/students/](https://hr.msu.edu/benefits/students/index.html "Student Insurance").

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Footnote: \
^1^For benefit purposes only, half-time is defined as 50.0-64.9 percent
time; three-quarter time is defined as 65.0-89.9 percent time; full-time
is 90.0-100.0 percent time.\
\
[Back to Faculty
Handbook](https://hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/7Section-Benefits.html)
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/faculty-handbook/VisitingFaculty_benefits.pcf)
