---
title: '2.1 Planning the Academic Hiring Procedure'
---

::: {#body}
Academic Hiring Manual

**2.1 Planning the Academic Hiring Procedure**

The annual budget planning process is the critical vehicle for
employment planning. Although its outcomes are shaped by college and
unit planning processes which take account of special college/unit
traditions and practices, MSU\'s Bolder by Design strategic plan
provides an organizational/philosophic overlay to the planning process.
Central to employment planning decisions must be a commitment to advance
the university\'s realization of equal opportunity, affirmative action
and diversity. Equity, educational, organizational and business reasons
all require MSU to advance the diversity of its faculty/academic staff
compliment.

Chairpersons and Deans have a responsibility as an individual to provide
written support for and/or concurrence with recommendations to establish
new positions or to fill vacant positions. Planning dialogues between
the Chairperson and Dean are expected to address, but not be limited to
the following factors:

::: {xmlns=""}
-   Assessment of staffing needs in light of college/unit priorities
    identified in the budget planning process consistent with Bolder by
    Design
-   The specific qualification needs for faculty/academic staff to meet
    college/unit program priorities
-   The relative merit as to filling positions on a continuing or fixed
    term basis in light of program, market and budgetary considerations
-   Consideration of current unit representational patterns and current
    placement goals, as well as the elements of a broad-based search
    plan to ensure a diverse candidate pool in each faculty/academic
    staff search. The required development of a search plan and a
    Chairperson charge to each search committee which, inter alia,
    emphasize the importance of equal opportunity, affirmative action
    and diversity considerations makes Dean/Chairperson dialogue on
    these topics absolutely essential.
:::

In order to support administrators in fulfilling their affirmative
action responsibilities, new regular and acting
Deans/Chairpersons/School Directors meet individually with the Director
and Senior Advisor for Inclusion and Intercultural Initiatives for
orientation in unit-specific affirmative action concerns including
specific expectations University policy places upon them; how to conduct
affirmative action review sessions with search committees; where to find
and how to interpret the numerical data provided on affirmative action
issues; and how to get assistance if necessary in fulfilling University
expectations on affirmative action. In addition, the Office of the
Provost provides workshops on an ongoing basis to provide administrators
with training and orientation in fulfilling MSU\'s affirmative action
policies.\
\
[Back to Academic Hiring
Manual](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/academic-hiring-manual/index.html "Academic Hiring Manual")
:::

[Â©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/academic-hiring-manual/planning.pcf)
