---
title: '2.2 Search Plan and Position Request - Academic Hiring Manual'
---

::: {#body}
Academic Hiring Manual

**2.2 Search Plan and Position Request - Academic Hiring Manual**

::: {xmlns=""}
**A.  Search plan **(Chairperson may want to confirm that the Dean will
approve the position before initiating the formal process of search plan
and position request.) \

1.  Search Committee:
    -   The Chairperson is responsible for determining the final
        composition of search committees. A unit may use the same search
        committee for more than one vacancy.
    -   Each search committee must have a member (of any gender or
        race/ethnic id) designated to act as affirmative action
        advocate. This member shall evaluate the search on an on-going
        basis, in terms of the goals and principles of affirmative
        action, equal opportunity, non-discrimination and diversity and
        bring deficiencies to the attention of the search committee (or
        as necessary to the attention of the Chairperson) for corrective
        action, including but not limited to:

    <!-- -->

    -    
        -   discriminatory bias, prejudice or stereotyping in
            communications, including but not limited to committee
            discussions, written communications, and interview questions
        -   inadequate/ineffective search strategies for identifying
            qualified individuals of underutilized groups, and
            soliciting applications from such individuals
        -   inadequate representation of underutilized groups in
            applicant or candidate pools
        -   discriminatory bias, prejudice or stereotyping in criteria
            for the evaluation of applicants\' materials and
            candidates\' interviews
        -   little or no weight given to affirmative action goals as a
            factor in the decision making process

    <!-- -->

    -   It is highly desirable, but not required, to have a diverse
        search committee, including tenured (where possible) minority
        and women members/consultants.

2.  Affirmative Action Session: The Chairperson must conduct an
    affirmative action session with the search committee. At this
    session the Chairperson delivers the charge to the search committee
    and the charge to the search committee member designated as
    affirmative action advocate. The session will focus on the
    University\'s commitment to affirmative action and equal
    opportunity, and to a fair, legal, and effective recruitment process
    which advances diversity and excellence in the academic workforce;
    and on the search committee members\' personal responsibility and
    accountability for affirmative action. The \"[Handbook for Faculty
    Searches with Special Reference to Affirmative
    Action](/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/affirmative-action/index.html "Affirmative Action Hiring")\" and
    the \"Faculty Search Toolkit\" must be shared and reviewed with the
    search committee along with the unit\'s affirmative action goals and
    timetables. Search procedures and strategies should be discussed.\
    \
    This session must occur prior to initiation of the posting and
    recruitment process. The staff of the Office of Inclusion and
    Intercultural Initiatives (I3) is available as a resource for those
    conducting review sessions and also for the search committee\'s
    affirmative action advocate. For assistance, contact Ms. Paulette
    Granberry Russell, Director and Senior Advisor, I3, at 517-353-3924.
3.  Chairperson submits the [Academic Hiring Availability Data &
    Recruitment Activities
    form](https://facacadplacementgoals.hr.msu.edu/application/AcademicHiringReport.jsf) and
    the CHR Approved Academic Position Request form, which includes the
    \"Search Committee Composition\" to the Dean.
:::

**B. Position Request: **Chairperson submits electronically the Academic
Position Create Request including advertisement to the Dean.

::: {xmlns=""}
-   Use the CHR Approved Academic Position Request form for both
    continuing positions (those without end dates) and fixed term
    positions (those with end dates).
-   For specialist positions, also submit the Specialist Position
    Description.
-   Tenure system positions are generally requested at the assistant
    professor level. When requesting a rank of associate or full
    professor, supporting commentary which justifies the need for the
    position at this rank is required.
:::

**C.  Dean approves **the CHR Approved Academic Position Request form
(including Search Committee Composition) and the Academic Hiring
Availability Data & Recruitment Activities form and submits them
together with the Specialist Position Description (for specialists only)
and supporting commentary (for tenure system positions at rank of
associate or full professor) as a package to the Office of Academic
Human Resources.

**D.  The Provost **approves the position request taking into
consideration, level of unit productivity, enrollment projections, staff
flexibility, program needs, priorities (University and college), budget
implications, affirmative action goals, staff flexibility, and salary
range. A disapproved position request is returned to the Dean at this
point. \
\
**E.  Human Resources** posts approved positions on the [Careers @
MSU websites](http://careers.msu.edu/cw/en-us/listing/ "MSU Careers Website").\
\
**F.  I^3^ reviews the Academic Hiring Availability Data & Recruitment
Activities form** **and the search committee composition in the Academic
Position Create Request form** for evidence of effective affirmative
action, equal opportunity and non-discrimination in the search plan, and
returns it along with the CHR Approved Academic Position Request form to
the Dean. If the Academic Hiring Availability Data & Recruitment
Activities form is disapproved, the Dean returns it to the Chairperson
who takes steps to correct the problem. A copy of the Academic Hiring
Availability Data & Recruitment Activities form reflecting the
corrective steps is sent successively to the Dean and I3 which approves
or disapproves it and returns it to the Dean. This procedure is repeated
until I3 approves the Academic Hiring Availability Data & Recruitment
Activities form. \
\
**G.  Any changes in the search committee** composition should be
submitted immediately to the Office of Inclusion and Intercultural
Initiatives and Monitoring via a CHR Approved Academic Position Request
form. \
\
**H.  If a position is not filled within two years** of Human Resources
approval, the unit must start over with the search plan, position
request, and posting process. If a search is to be completed shortly
after the conclusion of a 2-year period or has been completed, but the
individual will not be joining the MSU faculty for some time, the Dean
notifies the Associate Provost/VP for Academic Human Resources by
e-mail, listing the position number affected and an estimate of the
projected date on which the appointment materials are to be submitted to
the Office of Academic Human Resources; then sends the appointment
materials on or before the projected date. \
\
**I.  To modify a previously approved position**, the Dean emails the
Associate Provost/VP for Academic Human Resources to request approval.\
\
[Back to Academic Hiring
Manual](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/academic-hiring-manual/index.html "Academic Hiring Manual")
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/academic-hiring-manual/SearchPlan_PositionRequest.pcf)
