---
title: |
    2.7 Summary of the Academic Hiring Procedure For Use by Unit
    Administrators
---

::: {#body}
Academic Hiring Manual

**2.7 Summary of the Academic Hiring Procedure For Use by Unit
Administrators**

**Search Plan and Position Request **\
Get Dean\'s informal confirmation that position will be approved.

Set up search committee (usually 5-9 members) and designate one member
to be affirmative action advocate. See \"Academic Hiring Procedure\"
for [charge to the affirmative action
advocate](/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/academic-hiring-manual/SearchPlan_PositionRequest.html "Search Plan").

Include (preferably tenured) women and minorities whenever possible on
search committees.

Chairperson conducts affirmative action session with search committee,
including identification of all underutilization. Chairperson gives
charge to committee and affirmative action advocate, and explains
documentation requirements. Chairperson makes the \"Handbook for Faculty
Searches \...\" which contains information on documentation, a checklist
of search committee activities, legal guidelines for interviews, etc.
available to the search committee.

Consult the \"Handbook for Faculty Searches \...\" for [search
strategies](/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/affirmative-action/advertising.html "Search Strategies") to
increase the number of women and/or minority candidates.

Write position advertisement.

Chairperson submits CHR Approved Academic Position Request and the
Academic Hiring Availability Data & Recruitment Activities form to the
Dean for approval.

Human Resources approves CHR Approved Academic Position Request. Office
of Inclusion and Intercultural Initiatives (I3) approves the Academic
Hiring Availability Data & Recruitment Activities form and the search
committee composition on the CHR Approved Academic Position Request
form. \
\
**Advertising, Recruiting and Screening **\
Make sure Human Resources has approved the position before advertising.
If I3 requires or suggests additional steps to identify a diverse set of
candidates, make sure these steps are taken.

Tenure and continuing system positions must be advertised nationally or
within the geographical area customary for the appointment. Positions
may also be posted locally and/or internationally.

Application deadline date must be at least 2 weeks after posting date
but preferably longer. Allow ample time (usually at least 1 month but
preferably longer) for the period between posting and hiring.

Chairperson has primary responsibility to ensure adequate representation
based on current availability percentages of women and minority groups
among the initial applicants and in the candidates remaining after each
screening process. Dean approves initial applicant pool.

Search committee screens all candidates on the basis of 1) programmatic
need, 2) excellence of qualifications and credentials based on clearly
delineated job-related criteria, 3) placement goals and 4) diversity
considerations, and recommends a list of final (on-campus interview)
candidates.

Chairperson, Dean and I3 approve the final (on-campus interview)
candidate list. If I3 determines that the final candidate list is not
adequate, take the necessary steps to achieve appropriate representation
on the list.

Search committee must not send any letters of rejection nor schedule any
interviews until after I3 has approved the final candidate list.

Search committee and others interview all the candidates on the final
list making sure legal guidelines are followed and that treatment and
standards for evaluation (including reference checks) are consistent for
all candidates.

**Final Selection **\
Search committee makes its final recommendation, submits its report to
the Chairperson, and ensures that all the required documentation for the
search is ready to be filed.

Dean approves final selection and terms of appointment ensuring
consistency with the CHR Approved Academic Position Request, and
ensuring clear and convincing evidence of affirmative action, equal
opportunity and non-discrimination in the decisions which have been
made.

Prior approval from Provost and President must be obtained to appoint as
associate professor with tenure; prior approval from Provost must be
obtained to appoint as senior academic specialist with continuing
appointment.

Chairperson writes letter of offer making sure all the required
information is included.

When candidate accepts offer, fill out \"[Exposure to Health Risks /
Physical Demands
form](https://www.hr.msu.edu/ua/hiring/documents/HealthRiskPhysDemands.pdf "Health Risks/Physical Demands form")\"
form if any conditions listed on the form apply to the position, send
the form to the applicable office, schedule an appointment for
evaluation before the employee begins work.

Chairperson submits the Appointment form, Search Committee Report and
all other required attachments to Dean. See \"Academic Hiring
Procedure\" for [required
attachments](/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/academic-hiring-manual/final_appointment.html "Required attachments ").

Department keeps documentation of the search for 3 years after the
effective date of the hire.

I3 makes an affirmative action evaluation of selection of new hires and
terms of appointment, and submits annual report to the Provost with a
copy to the Dean.\
\
[Back to Academic Hiring
Manual](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/academic-hiring-manual/index.html "Academic Hiring Manual")
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/academic-hiring-manual/unit_admin_summary.pcf)
