---
title: Human Resource Definitions
---

::: {#body}
Support Staff

**Human Resource Definitions**

**Regular Employee**: A regular employee works a continuing schedule of
20 or more predetermined hours each week for a duration generally
exceeding nine months.

**Temporary Employee**: Generally, a temporary employee is one who is
initially employed for fewer than nine months.

**On-call**: These employees work an irregular schedule of hours
equating to less than half time depending upon the need of the
institution.

**Full-time**: These employees work 36 to 40 hours each week.

**Three-quarter-time**: These employees work at least 26 but less than
36 hours per week.

**Half-time**: These employees work at least 20 but fewer than 26 hours
per week.

**Proportional Benefits**: Where reference is made for part-time
employees to receive benefits, the applicable university contribution is
provided as follows:

\*Half-time employees: 50 percent

\*Three-quarter-time employees: 75 percent

**Exempt Employee**: Employees who are exempt under the definitions of
the Federal Fair Labor Standards Act will not normally receive overtime
pay (except administrative professionals and supervisory levels 8
through 11).

**Nonexempt Employee**: Nonexempt employees working in excess of 40
hours in a week shall be given the choice of: compensatory time off at
time and one-half or overtime pay at the rate of not less than one and
one-half times the regular rate of pay.

This standard varies by collective bargaining unit. For more
information, check the [applicable Collective Bargaining
Agreement](https://hr.msu.edu/contracts/index.html "Union Contracts") 
or the [Support Staff Policy and Procedure on
Overtime](https://hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/support-staff/support-staff-policies-procedures/overtime.html "Policy and Procedure on Overtime").

**Discharge**: Termination of employment for disciplinary or other
involuntary reasons

**Layoff**: Inactive employment status resulting from reduction of the
work force due to lack of funds, lack of work, and/or other cause

**Other Eligible Individual (OEI)**: Under the Other Eligible Individual
(OEI) program a benefits eligible MSU employee or retiree who does not
have a spouse eligible to enroll for health, dental, supplemental life
insurance, and/or accidental death & dismemberment coverage may enroll
one (1) OEI, but only if ALL of the following eligibility criteria are
met:

\*The OEI currently resides in the same residence as the employee and
has done so for the last 18 continuous months, other than as a tenant;

\*The OEI is not a "dependent" of the employee as defined by the IRS;
and

\*The OEI is not eligible to inherit from the employee under the laws of
intestate succession in the State of Michigan.

For [additional information regarding
OEIs](https://www.hr.msu.edu/benefits/other-eligible-individual/index.html "Other Eligible Individual Information"),
including benefit eligibility for Other Eligible Individual's children,
please look online.
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/support-staff/support-staff-handbook/ss-handbook/employee-rights/hr_definitions.pcf)
