---
title: New Employees
---

::: {#body}
Support Staff

**New Employees**

**Orientation**

All newly hired support staff employees who are hired into regular
positions are required to attend an orientation program presented by MSU
Human Resources. At this orientation, new employees will be provided a
wide range of employment-related information. Examples of information
shared include:

-   MSU History, Mission, and Structure
-   Health and Dental Coverage
-   Staff Identification Card
-   Parking Permit
-   W-4 Tax Form
-   I-9 Form
-   Union Dues
-   Health Exposure/Physical Demands (if applicable)
-   Policy on Relationship Violence & Sexual Misconduct
-   Collective Bargaining Agreement
-   Drug-Free Workplace Policy

During orientation, Human Resources also provides important information
on how to activate each employee's MSU NetID. The MSU NetID is a unique,
alphanumeric identifier assigned to all current MSU faculty, staff,
students and retirees. The MSU NetID provides access to the official MSU
network and email system as well as many other online services. Access
to MSU systems and online services is granted based on the employee's
role. All employees are required to activate their MSU NetID account.

Employees who are foreign nationals are also required to secure valid
immigration status and work authorization before their expected start
date, and maintain valid immigration status and work authorization
throughout the employment. For the limited purpose of complying with
federal export control regulations, a foreign national may be required
to provide information about his/her citizenship status depending on the
nature of the employment activities. If subject to federal export
control regulations, the foreign national may also be required to
maintain full-time employment status at MSU, confirm that his/her
permanent abode throughout the period of employment is in the U.S., and
sign a confidentiality agreement concerning transfer of certain
technical data. See 22 CFR 125.4. Prior to beginning work, all foreign
nationals should contact the Office of Export Control and Trade
Sanctions at 517-432-4499 or <export@msu.edu> to ensure compliance with
export control requirements.

Each new employee will also be given an introduction to the work
environment by the department or work group and instruction in the
performance of specific tasks. Contact Human Resources at 517-353-4434
for more information.

**Probationary Period**

Employees serve a probationary period commencing at the time of hire and
when transferring from one bargaining unit to another through the posted
vacancy process. Duration of the probationary period varies among
employee groups and bargaining units. Before the end of the probationary
period, the supervisor assesses the employee's overall work performance
to determine whether the employee will successfully complete probation.
For more information, refer to the [applicable Collective Bargaining
Agreement](https://hr.msu.edu/contracts/index.html "Union Contracts") or
the [policy and procedure regarding probationary
periods](https://hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/support-staff/support-staff-policies-procedures/probation.html "Policy and Procedure on Probationary Periods").

**Working Hours**

The normal workweek for most staff members consists of five eight-hour
days, Monday through Friday. Office hours are normally from 8 a.m. until
5 p.m. Lunch is normally one hour. A different schedule of hours and
staggered shifts are maintained in some departments. Immediate
supervisors inform staff of the work schedule. [Click
here](https://hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/support-staff/support-staff-policies-procedures/work_schedules.html "Working Hours")
for additional information regarding working hours.

**Flexible Schedules**

In some cases, employees may be eligible to work a flexible schedule.
This entails mutually agreed upon arrangements between a supervisor and
employee and allows the employee to complete their duties while working
non-traditional schedules. [Click
here](https://worklife.msu.edu/workplace-assistance/flexible-work "Flexible Schedules")
for additional information regarding flexible schedules.

**Rest Periods**

Employees are permitted one rest period not to exceed 15 minutes during
each half-day (four hours) of work. Rest periods are scheduled by the
supervisor and are to be taken at a time and in a manner that does not
interfere with the efficiency of the work unit. The rest period is
intended to be a recess that is preceded and followed by an extended
work period. Thus, a rest period may not be used to cover late arrival
to work, early departure, or extended lunch break, nor may it be
accumulated if not taken. [Click
here](https://hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/support-staff/support-staff-policies-procedures/rest.html "Rest Periods")
for additional information regarding rest periods.

**Identification Card**

The MSU identification card (ID) card establishes identity as an MSU
employee and also provides electronic access control to buildings and
parking gates, MSU Library services, Spartan Cash, and residence hall
meal plans. It may also be used to establish identity for use of
intramural facilities, golf course, and other campus activities and
facilities.

All new staff members are issued an ID card at MSU Human Resources
during orientation. Current employees who wish to update or replace
their ID card should visit the MSU ID Office in 170 International Center
Building (8 a.m.-5 p.m., Monday through Friday). Spouses of staff are
also eligible for an ID card.  For more information regarding IDs,
[click here](http://idoffice.msu.edu/index.html "Identification Cards").

**Emergency Contact Information**

At the time of hire, employees are required to designate an emergency
contact and provide the University with contact information for this
person so that a University representative can reach the appropriate
person in emergency situations. Employees should update emergency
contact information as needed through the [Enterprise Business
System](https://login.msu.edu/?App=EBSP-SecPortal "Enterprise Business System") portal.

**Uniforms**

Some units require employees to wear uniforms for purposes of safety,
health, or identification. In those cases where uniforms are provided to
employees by the University, the uniforms may be laundered and
maintained by the University.
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/support-staff/support-staff-handbook/ss-handbook/employee-rights/new_employees.pcf)
