---
title: 'Equal Opportunity, Nondiscrimination, and Affirmative Action'
---

::: {#body}
Support Staff

**Equal Opportunity, Nondiscrimination, and Affirmative Action**

Michigan State University is committed to the principles of equal
opportunity, nondiscrimination and affirmative action. The MSU
Anti-Discrimination Policy prohibits acts of discrimination and
harassment on the basis of age, color, gender, gender identity,
disability status, height, marital status, national origin, political
persuasion, race, religion, sexual orientation, veteran status or
weight. The University is also guided by the following federal and state
civil rights laws that prohibit discrimination in the following areas:

**Race, Color, Religion, Sex, National Origin:**

Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended, protects
applicants and employees from discrimination in hiring, promotion,
discharge, pay, fringe benefits, job training, classification, referral,
and other aspects of employment, on the basis of race, color, religion,
sex (including pregnancy), or national origin. Religious discrimination
includes failing to reasonably accommodate an employee's religious
practices where the accommodation does not impose undue hardship. Title
VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 prohibits discrimination based on
race, color, or national origin in any program or activity receiving
federal financial assistance. Executive Order 11246 prohibits job
discrimination on the basis of race, gender, or national origin, and
requires affirmative action to ensure equality of opportunity in all
aspects of employment.

**Disability:**

Title I and Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, as
amended, protect qualified individuals from discrimination on the basis
of disability in hiring, promotion, discharge, pay, fringe benefits, job
training, classification, referral, and other aspects of employment.
Disability discrimination includes not making reasonable accommodation
to the known physical or mental limitations of an otherwise qualified
individual with a disability who is an applicant or employee, barring
undue hardship. Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 prohibits
discrimination on the basis of disability in admission, employment,
treatment, or access in programs or activities receiving federal
financial assistance. The Michigan Persons with Disabilities Civil
Rights Act of 1976 provides individuals the opportunity to obtain
employment, housing, and full and equal utilization of public
accommodations, public services, and educational facilities without
discrimination because of a disability.

**Age:**

The Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967, as amended, protects
applicants and employees 40 years of age or older from discrimination
based on age in hiring, promotion, discharge, pay, fringe benefits, job
training, classification, referral, and other aspects of employment. The
Age Discrimination Act of 1975 prohibits discrimination based on age in
programs or activities receiving federal financial assistance.

**Sex:**

In addition to sex discrimination prohibited by Title VII of the Civil
Rights Act, the Equal Pay Act of 1963, as amended, prohibits sex
discrimination in the payment of wages to women and men performing
substantially equal work, in jobs that require equal skill, effort, and
responsibility, under similar working conditions, in the same
establishment. Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 prohibits
discrimination based on gender in education programs or activities.
Protection is extended to include employment and admissions at
institutions that receive federal financial assistance.

**Genetic Information:**

Title II of the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act ("GINA") of
2008 protects applicants and employees from discrimination based on
genetic information in hiring, promotion, discharge, pay, fringe
benefits, job training, classification, referral, and other aspects of
employment. GINA also restricts employers' acquisition of genetic
information and strictly limits disclosure of genetic information.
Genetic information includes information about genetic tests of
applicants, employees, or their family members; the manifestation of
diseases or disorders in family members (family medical history); and
requests for or receipt of genetic services by applicants, employees, or
their family members.

**Military Service Members and Veterans:**

The Uniformed Services Employment and Re-employment Rights Act of 1994,
as amended, prohibits discrimination against persons because of their
service in the Armed Forces Reserve, the National Guard, or other
uniformed services. The act protects the rights of veterans, reservists,
National Guard members, and certain other members of the uniformed
services to reclaim their civilian employment after being absent due to
military service or training. The Vietnam Era Veterans Readjustment Act
of 1972 prohibits certain government contractors from discriminating
against qualified disabled veterans or Vietnam era veterans. The act
also requires contractors to engage in affirmative action to employ and
advance veterans in employment.

**Other:**

The Elliott-Larson Civil Rights Act (1976) of the State of Michigan
prohibits discrimination practices, policies, and customs, based on
religion, race, color, national origin, age, gender, height, weight,
familial status, or marital status.

For more information about the University\'s nondiscrimination policies,
contact the Office for Inclusion and Intercultural Initiatives at
517-353-3922 or visit their
[website](http://www.inclusion.msu.edu "Office for Inclusion and Intercultural Initiatives"). \
\
[Back to Support Staff
Handbook](https://hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/support-staff/support-staff-handbook/ss-handbook/diversity/index.html)
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/support-staff/support-staff-handbook/ss-handbook/diversity/equal-opp_nondiscrim_aa.pcf)
