---
title: MSU Drug and Alcohol Policy for Student Employees
---

::: {#body}
Student Handbook

**MSU Drug and Alcohol Policy for Student Employees**

::: {xmlns=""}
**The following is Michigan State University\'s Drug and Alcohol Policy
for employees and students.**
:::

**Employees** ^(1)^\
Consistent with state and federal Law, Michigan State University will
maintain a workplace free from the unlawful manufacture, distribution,
dispensation, possession or use of a controlled substance ^(2)^ . The
unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensation, possession or use of
controlled substances, illicit drugs and alcohol are prohibited on any
property under control of and governed by the Board of Trustees of
Michigan State University, and at any site where work is performed by
individuals on behalf of Michigan State University.

Pursuant to applicable University procedures governing employee
discipline, any employee involved in the unlawful, use, sale,
manufacturing, dispensing or possession of controlled substances,
illicit drugs and alcohol on University premises or work sites, or
working under the influence of such substances, will be subject to
disciplinary action up to and including dismissal and referral for
prosecution.

The employee must notify the University of any criminal drug statute
conviction for a violation occurring in the workplace no later than five
(5) calendar days after such conviction. Failure to provide such notice
will subject the employee to discipline up to and including dismissal
pursuant to applicable University procedures governing employee
discipline. The employee shall notify his/her immediate supervisor, who
will report the incident to the Office of Human Resources, Academic
Human Resources or MSU Student Employment.

Michigan State University supports and sponsors programs aimed at the
prevention of substance abuse by University employees. The [Employee
Assistance Program](http://eap.msu.edu/ "Employee Assistance Program")
provides preventative programs and counseling for employees experiencing
substance-dependency problems. Assistance is available on a voluntary
basis. Leaves of absence to obtain treatment may be obtained under the
medical leave provision of the appropriate labor contract or policy.

^(1)^ This policy applies to all University employees, including but not
limited to: faculty, academic staff, support staff and student
employees.\
^(2)^ Five schedules of controlled substances are defined in the
comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970, 21. U.S.C.
812.

**Students**\
Michigan State University\'s compliance with provisions of the Drug-Free
Schools and Communities Act Amendments of 1989 applying to students is
achieved through a comprehensive alcohol and other drug prevention
program which includes policy enforcement, education programs and
treatment services.

General Student Regulations 2.06 and 2.07 prohibit the unlawful
possession, use, or distribution of illicit drugs and alcohol by
students on Michigan State University property or as part of any of its
activities. These regulations are as follows:\
2.06 \"No student shall possess, use, manufacture, produce, sell,
exchange or otherwise distribute any drug prohibited by federal or state
laws.\"\
2.07 \"No student shall possess, consume, furnish, manufacture, sell,
exchange or otherwise distribute any alcoholic beverages except as
permitted by state law and University ordinance.\"

Alleged violations of MSU regulations are adjudicated through the MSU
student judicial process. Consequences for violations may include, but
are not limited to, some form of disciplinary probation, required
attendance at educational programs, referral for assessment and
treatment, relocation to a new living environment, and suspension from
Michigan State University for sale of illegal drugs or repeated
violations of the regulations. In addition, students can expect to be
arrested and fined for violations of State Law on campus.

Michigan State University supports and sponsors programs aimed at the
prevention of substance abuse by students. Information about education
and treatment services may be obtained from the [Employee Assistance
Program](http://eap.msu.edu/ "Employee Assistance Program").

[Go Back to the Student Employment Manual
Index](/policies-procedures/student-handbook/index.html "Student Employment Manual")
:::

[Â©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/student-handbook/drug_and_alcohol%20.pcf)
