---
title: Protection for Employees with Disabilities
---

::: {#body}
Support Staff

**Protection for Employees with Disabilities**

Michigan State University is committed to hiring qualified persons with
disabilities and to fulfilling its responsibilities under state and
federal civil rights laws and the University's Anti-Discrimination
Policy. University employees or job applicants who believe they need an
accommodation should refer to the [Disability/Reasonable Accommodations
Policy](/policies-procedures/support-staff/support-staff-policies-procedures/disability.html "Disability/Reasonable Accomodations Policy").

Copies of the policy can also be obtained from the Resource Center for
Persons with Disabilities (RCPD). An employee/applicant or
supervisor/unit administrator who disagrees with the RCPD's
determination regarding reasonable accommodation may appeal the decision
to the Director of the RCPD or the ADA Coordinator in the Office for
Inclusion and Intercultural Initiatives.

The Office for Inclusion & Intercultural Initiatives is the office of
the ADA Coordinator, Paulette Granberry Russell. Her contact information
is:

Paulette Granberry Russell

444 Administration Building

Michigan State University

East Lansing, MI 48824

(517)353-3924 

RCPD maintains records of accommodations made for persons with a
disability and is available for consultation with employees/applicants
or supervisors/unit administrators about the accommodation process. For
more information regarding accommodations, please contact RCPD at
517-884-RCPD (884-7273) (TTY) or <rcpd@msu.edu>, or visit their
[website](http://www.rcpd.msu.edu/ "RCPD Website"). \
\
[Back to Support Staff
Handbook](https://hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/support-staff/support-staff-handbook/ss-handbook/diversity/index.html) 
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/support-staff/support-staff-handbook/ss-handbook/diversity/protection_disabilities.pcf)
