---
title: |
    Appendix B. Legal Basis of Affirmative Action - Affirmative Action
    Handbook
---

::: {#body}
Affirmative Action

**Appendix B. Legal Basis of Affirmative Action - Affirmative Action
Handbook**

::: {xmlns=""}
There are numerous federal and state legislative acts and executive
orders which prohibit discrimination of various types in the workplace.
Among the more important pieces of legislation which provide a legal
basis for the goals of both equal employment opportunity and affirmative
action, are the following (Information adapted from \"Federal
Administrative Requirements for Colleges and Universities,\" National
Association of College and University Business Officers):
:::

**Title VI of the Civil Rights Act**, as amended. This act prohibits
discrimination on the basis of race, color, or national origin.

**Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964**, as amended. This act
prohibits discrimination in employment (including hiring, upgrading,
salaries, fringe benefits, training, treatment of pregnancy, and other
conditions of employment) on the basis of race, color, religion,
national origin, or gender.

**Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972**, as amended. This act
prohibits discrimination on the basis of gender.

**Executive Order 11246**, as amended. This presidential executive order
prohibits federal contractors and subcontractors (like MSU) from
discriminating against any employee or applicant for employment because
of race, color, religion, gender, or national origin. In compliance with
this Order, contractors take affirmative action to ensure that protected
class, underutilized applicants are employed, and that employees are
treated without discriminatory regard to their protected class status.

**Equal Pay Act of 1963**, as amended. This act prohibits discrimination
in salaries (including almost all fringe benefits) on the basis of
gender.

**Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967**. This act prohibits
discrimination against applicants and employees who are 40 or more years
of age.

**Age Discrimination Act of 1975**. This act prohibits discrimination on
the basis of age.

**Vietnam-Era Veterans Readjustment Assistance Act of 1974**. This act
prohibits discrimination in employment practices (including hiring,
upgrading, demotion or transfer, recruitment, layoff or termination,
rate of pay, or other forms of compensation and selection for training)
on the basis of being either a disabled veteran or a veteran of the
Vietnam era.

**Section 503 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973**, as amended. This act
sets affirmative action obligations of federal contractors and
subcontractors with respect to employees and for the advancement in
employment of persons with disabilities.

**Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973**, as amended. The act
prohibits discrimination against any qualified applicants, students, or
employees on the basis of disabilities in all programs and activities
receiving federal funds.

**The Retirement Equity Act of 1984**. This act is designed to provide
greater pension equity for women and for all workers, their spouses, and
dependents by taking into account changes in work patterns and in the
status of marriage (child care leave) as an economic partnership.

**Elliott-Larson Civil Rights Act (Michigan Act No. 453, Public Acts of
1976).** Prohibits discriminatory practices, policies and customs in the
exercise of defined civil rights, based upon religion, race, color,
national origin, age, gender, height, weight, or marital status.

**Michigan Persons with Disabilities Civil Rights Act** (Michigan Act
No. 220, Public Acts of 1976). This act defines the civil rights of
individuals who have disabilities; and prohibits discriminatory
practices, policies, and customs in the exercise of those rights.

**Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990. **This act defines the civil
rights of individuals who have disabilities; and prohibits
discriminatory practices, policies, and customs in the exercise of those
rights.

Michigan State University has long recognized its moral and ethical
responsibility to ensure equal opportunity in the workplace. \"The
policy of Michigan State University,\" as enunciated in the
MSU **Faculty Handbook** is, \"Michigan State University is committed to
the principles of equal opportunity, nondiscrimination and affirmative
action. University programs, activities and facilities are available to
all without regard to race, color, gender, religion, creed, national
origin, political persuasion, sexual orientation, marital status,
physical condition or age. The University is an Affirmative Action,
Equal Opportunity Employer.\" A booklet, **Human Rights, the
University\'s Commitment,** has been prepared to provide background, to
list in detail the Board of Trustees\' policies regarding equal
opportunity and to answer questions related to human rights. It is
available from the Office of Inclusion and Intercultural Initiatives.
Equal access to employment opportunities, admissions, educational
programs, and all other University activities is extended to all
persons, and the University promotes equal opportunity through a
positive and continuing affirmative action program.

Statutes, executive orders, and regulations do not, however,
automatically ensure equity and equality in employment. That can only be
achieved by the full and enthusiastic support of the ideals and goals of
affirmative action by all members of the University community.
Ultimately, we all have ownership of affirmative action.\
\
[Back to the Handbook for Faculty Searches with Special Reference to
Affirmative
Action](https://hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/affirmative-action/index.html)
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/affirmative-action/AAappendixB.pcf)
