---
title: '08\. Dual Career Couples - Affirmative Action Searches'
---

::: {#body}
Affirmative Action

**08. Dual Career Couples - Affirmative Action Searches**

::: {xmlns=""}
Search committees are frequently asked by an individual they are
recruiting about job possibilities for a spouse. If a spouse is
qualified for an academic position, you may wish to contact the
appropriate academic unit or college to explore appointment
opportunities. This type of activity may, of course, be reciprocal. It
may also be possible to appoint a spouse in a non-tenure system
position. If a faculty appointment is inappropriate, you may wish to
secure for her or him research space and library privileges. Admission
to a graduate program at MSU is another possibility. The Associate
Provost and Associate Vice President for Academic Human Resources
(353-5300) may be of assistance in exploring opportunities.
:::

An offer to recommend appointment of a woman and/or a minority candidate
may be acceptable to the individual, but the individual\'s final
acceptance of the offer may be conditional on her or his spouse finding
employment in the area and specifically at Michigan State University.
The receiving academic unit at MSU must be willing to accept the spouse
of your candidate. In such instances, it may be possible to use a Waiver
of posting/search requirements (See \"[When to Use the Affirmative
Action Hiring Procedure, and When to Use a
Waiver](/documents/facacadhandbooks/academichiring/AAhiringprocWaiver.htm "Academic Hiring Manual - use of waivers")\"
in the \"Academic Hiring Manual\") for the appointment of the
individual\'s spouse in an academic personnel system appointment. Again,
the Associate Provost and Associate Vice President for Academic Human
Resources should be contacted for assistance.

If the spouse wishes to apply for a support staff position, the
assistance of the Office of Human Resources (353-4434) should be sought
regarding position opportunities. If a spouse is interested in applying
for an elementary or secondary school teaching position, there are about
twelve school systems in central Michigan which may have employment
opportunities. Their administrative offices are listed in the Lansing
Area telephone book.

If the spouse is not interested in an academic appointment, the Lansing
Regional Chamber of Commerce (487-6340) may be of assistance in locating
employment. It has published the Membership Directory and the Industrial
Directory. Units can send the candidate copies of the classified
advertisements from the Sunday edition of the Lansing State Journal.
After knowing the career field of the spouse, creative planning should
help find suitable employment in central Michigan for her or him.\
\
[Back to the Handbook for Faculty Searches with Special Reference to
Affirmative
Action](https://hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/affirmative-action/index.html)
:::

[Â©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/affirmative-action/dual_career.pcf)
