---
title: |
    7.4.2 Essential Components for Special Situations - Affirmative Action
    Searches
---

::: {#body}
Affirmative Action

**7.4.2 Essential Components for Special Situations - Affirmative Action
Searches**

::: {xmlns=""}
**II. Essential Components for Special Situations**
:::

::: {xmlns=""}
** **
:::

::: {xmlns=""}
**A. Ph.D. Not Complete:** (example) This offer is contingent upon
completion of the Ph.D. degree by the beginning of fall semester. If you
do not complete all requirements for the degree by that time, you will
be appointed as an instructor and your base salary will be reduced by 10
percent. As soon as you receive your Ph.D. degree, we will recommend
promotion to the rank of assistant professor and a salary increase.
(Completion of all requirements means diploma-in-hand or written
verification from the dean of the graduate school of the degree-granting
institution that all requirements for the Ph.D. have been completed.)
:::

**B. Fixed Term Appointments: **Substitute for I.A. (example) You will
be appointed at the rank of assistant professor on an academic year
basis with a base salary of \$25,320 payable on the last working day of
each month. This is a fixed term appointment. The appointment will
commence on \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, and will end
on\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. The appointment carries no
presumption of academic tenure or reappointment beyond the period above.
All fixed term appointments are subject to approval of the Office of the
Provost; your appointment is subject to all rules, regulations and
policies of the University.

**C. Administrative Increment for Chairperson/Director:** (example) Your
salary rate on an annual year basis will be \$53,108. This salary rate
consists of two components: your regular nine-month salary as a full
professor of \$39,420 converted to an annual year basis of \$48,180 and
an administrative increment of \$4,928 for your administrative service.
At such time as you may relinquish the chairperson/director position,
the administrative increment will be removed from your salary and your
appointment will be converted to an academic year basis, as appropriate
given the University\'s basic employment commitment on an academic year
basis.

**D. Position requires a health assessment: **(example) Because your
position involves \[ describe the exposure to health risk \], this
appointment recommendation is subject to completion of a health
assessment before you begin your position. The health assessment can be
administered by the Michigan State University Health Center unless, at
your request, arrangements are made to have the assessment administered
by your physician.

**E. For all non-U.S. citizens/permanent residents: **There may be laws
(e.g., Export Administration Regulations and International Traffic in
Arms Regulations) that limit or prohibit your employment activities
because you are not a US citizen or permanent resident. It is your
responsibility to familiarize yourself with and abide by such laws. The
Office of Regulatory Affairs can provide you with information about such
laws and answer any questions you may have.

**F. Bringing select agents to campus: **If you anticipate bringing any
biological agents or toxins with you to campus, you must notify me
(department chairperson/school director) and complete\
a [Notification of Possession of Select Agents and High Consequence
Pathogens and Toxins
form](http://www.biosafety.msu.edu/selectagents/select_agent_form.PDF "Select Agents Form").
Because the registration process for select agents can take several
months, I ask that you notify us as soon as possible.

**G. Limit on MSU matching contribution to the 403(b) base retirement
program: **The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) places a compensation
limit on the amount of salary/wages that can be used in determining
employee and employer contributions to a 403 (b) retirement plan. The
salary cap, which is indexed annually for inflation, is \$255,000 for
2013 and \$260,000 for 2014. As applicable, offer letters should state
that the University matching contribution to the MSU base retirement
program is subject to the compensation limitations imposed by the IRS.\
\
[Back to the Handbook for Faculty Searches with Special Reference to
Affirmative
Action](https://hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/affirmative-action/index.html)
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/affirmative-action/essential_special.pcf)
