---
title: '6.4 Evaluating the Applicants - Affirmative Action Searches'
---

::: {#body}
Affirmative Action

**6.4 Evaluating the Applicants - Affirmative Action Searches**

::: {xmlns=""}
Although evaluation procedures vary, it is necessary for the search
committee to develop a rating form based on job-related criteria found
in the position description. The rating form may consist of a series of
job-related questions or issues that the committee believes are crucial
to the position. The rating form should be developed and approved by the
search committee before reviewing any candidate\'s dossier. The
committee should consider using a combination of a standardized list of
criteria to be evaluated by an agreed upon point system and written
comments reflecting the judgment of each member of the committee. The
former helps ensure that each member of the committee will use a uniform
standard in evaluating each candidate; the latter will permit an
informed discussion when deciding which candidates are to be
interviewed. It will also save time if it becomes necessary to return to
the applicant pool at a later date. Furthermore, recording the judgment
of the committee will facilitate completing the Affirmative Action
Report at the conclusion of the search. (See \"[Documenting the
Search](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/affirmative-action/documenting_search.html "Documenting the Search")\")
:::

It is not difficult to get a committee to agree that it should hire the
best candidate. Determining the criteria for measuring \"the best\" and
establishing who is \"the best\" is more difficult. The search committee
may wish to evaluate its selection criteria in terms of their validity
as predictors of future success. Is publication in graduate school, for
example, a valid or logical predictor of one\'s performance as a faculty
member? Are there other, more appropriate, predictors of future
performance for women and minorities, especially in cases where the
candidate\'s educational, social and cultural background is
significantly different from that of a caucasian man? Furthermore, the
committee may wish to examine a candidate\'s entire career when applying
its criteria for selection. A woman, for instance, who has earned her
degree and entered the academic profession after taking time out to
raise a family will undoubtedly have fewer publications than a man of
the same age whose career has been uninterrupted. If one evaluates her
publication record, however, in terms of the time period over which it
was produced, she may well have the stronger publication record.

In the evaluation process, a candidate\'s publication record is often
stressed to Brobdingnagian proportions, with all other achievements
remaining Lilliputian in comparison. While publications may be a
significant indicator of future success, they are not the only
indicator, nor are they solely indicative of the value of a candidate to
a unit. A search committee should evaluate candidates in broad and
comprehensive terms, carefully examining all of an individual\'s
accomplishments, her or his potential for growth, the diversity of
perspective that the candidate will bring and the unique contribution
which the candidate will make to the academic unit.

Search committees should also guard against biases which may
unconsciously intrude into their evaluation of a candidate. Degrees, for
instance, from women\'s colleges or Southern universities must not be
automatically seen as inadequate; reference letters from individuals not
known to search committee members should not automatically be given less
credence and importance than letters coming from friends and
organizations in the \"old boys\' network\"; scholarship on feminist or
minority issues should not be devalued because some may believe that it
is not \"in the mainstream.\" Sexist language, always reprehensible and
inappropriate, should not be used when discussing the candidates, since
it has been shown that language leads to mental imaging which in turn,
does influence one\'s vision of whom an appropriate candidate should be.
Likewise, it is vital to eliminate from the evaluation process any
stereotyped ideas based on the candidate\'s race, color, religion,
national origin, age or gender (e.g., the notions, for instance, that
women are more transient than men, or that persons with disabilities are
not interested in long-term careers). Applicants with disabilities
should be evaluated in terms of the actual position requirements and
with attention given to reasonable accommodations that can be made to
enable them to fill the position.

Whatever criteria are used, it is important that the criteria be applied
equally to all candidates. Based on their evaluations, the committee
either decides as a whole who will be interviewed or makes that
determination in consultation with the unit administrator to whom they
report. It should also be added that a nominee for a position is not a
candidate for the position until the individual nominated makes direct
contact with the search committee by letter, telephone or submission of
documents. Only bona fide candidates should be evaluated by the search
committee. An individual who has potential for being a very strong
candidate may be nominated, but she/he may decide to not apply for the
position. In this case the committee may ask permission to review the
individual\'s curriculum vitae as a non-candidate. If the individual
learns that she/he would rank highly among the candidates, she/he may
agree to apply for the position.

Most selection processes involve more than one screening. Generally, the
first screening determines if candidates meet the minimum criteria for
the position. Sometimes, however, highly qualified candidates may
stipulate conditions such as starting salary or rank that seem to
disqualify them from further consideration for the position. If such a
candidate appears to be a competitive, affirmative action candidate, the
committee should keep her/him in the pool. If the individual is
eventually judged to be highly qualified, the committee could seek
special support from the chairperson or dean to bring such a person to
campus. Subsequent screenings become increasingly qualitative and
increasingly difficult. A list of candidates removed from the applicant
pool during the first and subsequent screenings should be reviewed by
the unit administrator. The committee may want to devise a way of
reviewing any candidate whom the unit administrator wishes to return to
the applicant pool for the next screening. After the unit administrator
approves the list of candidates to be removed from the pool, polite
letters of rejection should be sent to candidates who do not meet the
minimum qualifications for the position.\
\
[Back to the Handbook for Faculty Searches with Special Reference to
Affirmative
Action](https://hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/affirmative-action/index.html)
:::

[Â©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/affirmative-action/evaluating.pcf)
