---
title: '7.2 The Interview - Affirmative Action Searches'
---

::: {#body}
Affirmative Action

**7.2 The Interview - Affirmative Action Searches**

::: {xmlns=""}
The interview is one of the most critical stages of the evaluation
process. It is generally the first opportunity for the candidate and the
search committee to interact with one another. The interview usually
takes place during the campus visit. The unit administrator should be
involved in planning the interview. Whether the unit administrator
interviews the candidate with the search committee and/or separately is
best decided at the local level. While the interview allows the search
committee to evaluate the candidate, it also permits the candidate to
judge both the search committee and the University. An interview that is
carefully planned, that begins on time, that allows the candidate to
present herself or himself in the best possible light and that elicits
the necessary job-related information, is a major element in
recruitment.
:::

Before the interview begins, it is advisable to review the candidate\'s
dossier and the job description. You may also wish to reflect on how to
create an atmosphere of openness in the interview, for it is essential
that the expectations which the committee has of a candidate and which a
candidate has of the position should be candidly expressed.

Before the interview, the search committee should prepare a group of
core questions based on the job-related criteria by which candidates are
to be evaluated. One should also examine the questions to determine if
any of them will have the effect of screening out women and minorities.
These questions should be asked of all candidates, thereby allowing
comparative judgments to be made, while insuring that crucial
job-related information is obtained. A patterned interview of this type
has the beneficial effect of minimizing unconscious biases.

A timeline should be set up for the interview to ensure that each
candidate has the same amount of time for each core question. One
candidate may use all of the allotted time to answer a core question,
while another candidate may answer the core question plus several
follow-up questions during the same amount of allotted time. Many search
committees have found that beginning with open-ended questions relaxes
the candidate and encourages her or him to speak freely. Follow-up
questions based on the responses to predetermined core questions will
most likely vary with each candidate. Time should also be allotted
during the interview for the candidates to ask questions of the
committee. The search committee can anticipate some of the candidate\'s
questions ahead of time to help them be better prepared during the
interview. The committee may agree to have the chairperson serve as the
committee\'s spokesperson and answer most of the candidate\'s questions.
In other cases, the committee may wish to assign specific categories of
questions to individuals with the most expertise in a given area. If the
search committee does not have the answer to a question during the
interview, the chairperson can find the answer and pass it on to the
candidate later.\
\
[Back to the Handbook for Faculty Searches with Special Reference to
Affirmative
Action](https://hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/affirmative-action/index.html)
:::

[Â©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/affirmative-action/interview.pcf)
