---
title: '7.4 Letter of Offer - Affirmative Action Searches'
---

::: {#body}
Affirmative Action

**7.4 Letter of Offer - Affirmative Action Searches**

::: {xmlns=""}
The letter of offer is sent by the unit administrator and/or dean. It is
to state specifically that the appointment is subject to the approval of
the Office of the Provost, the President and/or the Board of Trustees.
The letter sent to the candidate constitutes a binding commitment on the
part of Michigan State University and, if accepted, on the part of the
faculty/academic staff member. It is essential, then, for letters of
offer to be carefully written. To provide assistance, the following
guidelines cover the majority of situations; if, however, there are
unusual or special circumstances involved in your offer to a candidate,
please contact the Assistant Provost and Assistant Vice President for
Academic Human Resources (353-5300).
:::

A common practice during the hiring of a new faculty member is to
negotiate a start-up package. This package may include initial
laboratory space and equipment, monetary research support, technician
support and/or graduate student support. The purpose of the start-up
package is to assist a new faculty member with the generation of her or
his own funding for these items. Candidates may be unaware of the need
to negotiate a start-up package and should be informed of the
possibility in order to provide equitable treatment among faculty.
Without a start-up package, a new faculty member maybe at a
disadvantage.

Before sending a letter of offer to the woman or minority candidate a
unit wishes to hire, the unit administrator or search committee should
consider whether the salary level and academic rank are the same as they
would be for a Caucasian man with similar experience and
qualifications.\
\
[Back to the Handbook for Faculty Searches with Special Reference to
Affirmative
Action](https://hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/affirmative-action/index.html)
:::

[Â©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/affirmative-action/offer_letter.pcf)
