---
title: '6.5 References - Affirmative Action Searches'
---

::: {#body}
Affirmative Action

**6.5 References - Affirmative Action Searches**

::: {xmlns=""}
Some candidates will ask their units to submit letters of reference on
their behalf to the search committee; some will simply list the names
and addresses of references for the search committee to contact. The
search committee should inform the candidates about the minimum and
maximum number of references required for the screening process. When
writing to a reference, it is advisable to send a copy of the position
description with whatever questions concerning the candidate\'s
experience, qualifications and accomplishments the search committee
wishes the individual to address.
:::

If the search committee wants additional information or if the timeline
is brief, telephone recommendations may be obtained. This is a valuable
means of obtaining information about the candidate, for members of the
search committee are able to cover issues and explore areas that are of
interest to them and not necessarily to the referee. Specific,
job-related questions should be developed for the telephone interview.
Committee members doing telephone interviewing should use a consistent
set of questions for each candidate. If more than one committee member
is doing the calling, one person should call all references for a given
candidate. You may not ask questions of a referee which you are not
permitted to ask of the candidate at an interview (see \"[Questions You
May and May Not Ask of a
Candidate](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/affirmative-action/questions.html "Questions you may/may not ask of a candidate")\").
Multiple copies of the interview questions can be printed with a format
which has space for each question\'s answer to be written. Notes should
be taken during the conversation so that a written record of the
conversation may be placed in the candidate\'s folder.

If there are selected individuals whom the committee would like to
contact about the candidate\'s qualifications, it may inform the
candidate of its wishes. It is not necessary, however, to have the
candidate\'s permission in order to make such calls. All questions asked
and issues raised must, as with all references, be job-related and
should be similar for all candidates.

The search committee may request general personal and work references
not relating to race, color, religion, gender, sexual orientation,
national origin, physical condition or age. It may not request
references specifically from clergymen (unless they have an academic
relationship with the candidate) or from anyone who might reflect the
race, color, religion, gender, national origin, physical condition or
age of the candidate.

Occasionally members of a search committee will receive unsolicited
calls about a candidate. When this happens, it is advisable to ask the
caller to restrict her or his remarks to job-related issues. The names
of individuals who have provided information about a candidate to a
search committee should be retained. If a dispute arises, the University
may be requested to provide these names.

When the pool of applicants has been narrowed to the number of final
(on-campus interview) candidates specified in the charge, the search
committee completes part D of the Affirmative Action Report and waits
for approval from the unit administrator, the Dean and the Office of
Inclusion and Intercultural Initiatives before proceeding further.\
\
[Back to the Handbook for Faculty Searches with Special Reference to
Affirmative
Action](https://hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/affirmative-action/index.html)
:::

[Â©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/affirmative-action/references.pcf)
