---
title: |
    4.1 Composition of the Search Committee - Handbook for Faculty Searches
    with Special Reference to Affirmative Action
---

::: {#body}
Affirmative Action

**4.1 Composition of the Search Committee - Handbook for Faculty
Searches with Special Reference to Affirmative Action**

::: {xmlns=""}
No faculty committee has greater ability to make profound and
substantive changes in an academic unit than a search committee.
Membership on such committees should be reserved for individuals who
thoroughly understand the requirements of the position to be filled and
who are committed to the mission and goals of the unit and the
University. The search committee is formed to act on behalf of the
University. The search committee members are not representatives of
special interest groups.
:::

The committee members should have time in their schedules to serve in
this capacity and should be willing to serve. They should be able to
recognize talent and insist upon high-quality work. Members should be of
high personal integrity and be able to participate in a confidential
search process without gossiping. Leaking information to people outside
of the committee can be disruptive for the search process and can cause
the loss of high quality candidates.

The search committee should be composed of individuals from diverse
backgrounds in order to provide a variety of perspectives, as well as
sensitivity to affirmative action issues. It is desirable to include
women and minorities from within the academic unit on all search
committees, however, since these individuals tend to be asked frequently
to serve on an array of committees, this may not always be feasible. In
such cases, the unit administrator may wish to enlist the aid of women
and minorities either from other units within the college, from related
academic areas or from the community. Additionally, support staff and
community members may serve as consultants to the search committee and
play a useful role in identifying and interacting with applicants.

Experience has shown that search committees with at least five members
and at most nine members are most effective. However, some units may
have bylaws which require smaller or larger search committees. The
committee chairperson is very important for the committee\'s success and
should be a faculty member with leadership ability whom the unit
administrator can trust. The ability to deal with conflict situations
and handling paperwork are important skills for the chairperson. This
individual should also be able to keep the committee focused on the
charge and should be an advocate for MSU. Unit bylaws may require the
search committee to select its own chairperson. Otherwise, the unit
administrator may wish to select the committee chairperson. In this
latter case, the committee chairperson may also assist the unit
administrator with choosing the other committee members.

The search committee must designate one member to be the \"Affirmative
Action Advocate.\" This person need not be a woman or minority;
experience has shown that the role of affirmative action advocate can be
fulfilled effectively by a Caucasian man. The advocate should evaluate
all steps of the search process in terms of the goals and principles of
affirmative action, and bring deficiencies to the attention of the
search committee (or as necessary to the attention of the unit
administrator) for corrective action. The position should be widely
advertised and the search committee should not unconsciously engage in
discriminatory practices. In most academic disciplines, the greatest
challenge for the search committee will be to actively seek women and
minority applicants (see \"[Advertising and Enlarging the Pool of
Applicants](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/affirmative-action/advertising.html "Advertising and enlarging the applicant pool")\").
If necessary, a subcommittee formed from the search committee can
address this task. Ideally, each member of a search committee will
become an advocate for affirmative action.

Some units customarily place students on their search committees. There
is no University policy on this issue, and it is probably best decided
on a local level. In any event, students should have an opportunity to
meet a candidate in an informal setting or to attend a presentation made
by a candidate. The committee should invite students to share in search
activities and to share their views about candidates.

Since search committees function as advisory committees to a unit
administrator or dean, recommending one or more individuals for a
position, the unit administrator or dean should not be a member of the
committee.\
\
[Back to the Handbook for Faculty Searches with Special Reference to
Affirmative
Action](https://hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/affirmative-action/index.html)
:::

[Â©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/affirmative-action/search_committee.pcf)
