---
title: |
    4.2 Search Committee as University Representative - Affirmative Action
    Searches
---

::: {#body}
Affirmative Action

**4.2 Search Committee as University Representative - Affirmative Action
Searches**

::: {xmlns=""}
Given the current state of employment in higher education, it is not
unusual for a University of the stature of Michigan State to receive a
substantial number of applicants for one open faculty position. Since
the search committee may be the only contact many of these individuals
have had with Michigan State, it is in a unique position to enhance the
reputation and image of the University. While a search committee is
evaluating an applicant, the applicant is also evaluating the search
committee, the unit it represents and, ultimately, the institution.
:::

Most of the applicants for positions at Michigan State will eventually
enter the profession and will, in turn, work with colleagues and
students. The impression, then, that an applicant receives of the
University will reach many individuals beyond the applicant and will
influence our reputation and the success of future search committees.

If a search committee has been candid and forthright with applicants, if
time lines have been met, if promises have been kept, if correspondence
has been warmly professional, if form letters have not sounded like form
letters, if telephone inquiries have been politely answered, if
interviews have been probing yet cordial, if campus visits have been
well-planned and well-executed, then the search committee will be seen
as professional, humane and sensitive and the University as a healthy,
pleasant and supportive place to work. In a very real sense, it is
possible for a search committee to have been thoroughly successful even
if it has failed to hire its top candidate.\
\
[Back to the Handbook for Faculty Searches with Special Reference to
Affirmative
Action](https://hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/affirmative-action/index.html)
:::

[Â©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/affirmative-action/univ_rep.pcf)
