---
title: |
    11.4 The Women\'s Advisory Committee to the Provost - Affirmative Action
    Handbook
---

::: {#body}
Affirmative Action

**11.4 The Women\'s Advisory Committee to the Provost - Affirmative
Action Handbook**

::: {xmlns=""}
The[ Women\'s Advisory Committee to the
Provost](https://provost.msu.edu/planning/WACP.html "Women's Advisory Committee "),
a Board-established committee, advises the Provost on important issues
of special interest to women within the University community. In its
advisory capacity, the committee assists in identifying and in
suggesting solutions to important issues relative to the roles and
participation of women in the academic areas of the University. The
committee may consult with the Provost or members of the Provost\'s
staff to clarify and to discuss strategies for enhancing the experiences
of and conditions for women in the academic workplace.
:::

The composition of the committee is comprehensive in that it is
representative of the diversity of the women within the University\'s
academic programs. It includes minorities, faculty at all ranks, both
tenured and non-tenured, and members of the academic staff, such as
librarians and academic specialists.

The committee focuses on such issues as equity in and access to faculty
positions, tenure, promotion and salaries; sexual discrimination and
harassment; safety for women on campus, and gender equity in the
curriculum. Annually, the progress of the University\'s affirmative
action program is evaluated by the committee. And, the committee
actively participates in the development of programs, workshops and
forums that assist women faculty and academic staff in maximizing their
achievements.\
\
[Back to the Handbook for Faculty Searches with Special Reference to
Affirmative
Action](https://hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/affirmative-action/index.html)
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/affirmative-action/womens_adv_committee.pcf)
