---
title: 'Joint Appointments: Suggestions for Successful Implementation'
---

::: {#body}
Faculty Policies and Procedures

**Joint Appointments: Suggestions for Successful Implementation**

 Last updated: 6/24/15 (see bottom for details)

A significant number of tenure system faculty have appointments in more
than one academic unit. Joint appointments may occur in a variety of
forms, including:

::: {xmlns=""}
-   A continuing tenure system joint appointment,
-   An almost equal split between academic units,
-   A small fraction of time in one academic unit with another unit(s)
    as the majority shareholder,
-   For a specified period of time subject to renewal (or with no option
    for renewal),
-   An appointment between an academic unit and an administrative unit,
    or
-   An appointment on an adjunct or clinical basis without pay.
:::

Fixed term faculty and academic staff also may be involved in joint
appointments.

Given the increase in interdisciplinary and cross disciplinary
scholarship, joint appointments are likely to increase in the future.
Benefits to the university and faculty member include increased
opportunities for collaboration and multi-disciplinary teaching,
research and outreach assignments and activities.

While joint appointments offer a variety of advantages, they also pose
challenges. The purpose of this document is to provide assistance to
deans, chairpersons, directors and faculty members to help make joint
appointments a success. This document includes recommended best
practices for deans, department chairs and school directors who have
jointly appointed faculty members.

### []{#BestPractices}Best Practices for Managing Joint Appointments ^1^ {#best-practices-for-managing-joint-appointments1 xmlns=""}

Tenure system faculty at Michigan State University can be appointed in
two or more departments^2^ , and two or more colleges. While joint
appointments offer a variety of advantages, they also pose challenges.
The following are recommended best practices for administrators managing
jointly appointed faculty members

1\. All details about the joint appointment should be written and shared
with all parties. A [Multiple Appointment
Memorandum](https://www.hr.msu.edu/ua/forms/documents/MultipleAppointmentMemo.pdf "Multiple Appointment Memorandum") is
required for all joint appointments. Any issues not covered by the
Multiple Appointment Memorandum should be addressed in writing.

2\. Unit administrators should work together on a plan of work that is
mutually satisfactory to each department and the faculty member. It
should be recognized that joint appointments work best when a faculty
member's expected research program serves the needs of each department.
Unit administrators should agree on productivity expectations, the
format for reporting annual accomplishments, how departmental accounting
and other unit procedures are to be handled, etc. Duplication in
reporting of information should be avoided or minimized and reporting
deadlines coordinated.

3\. Unit administrators should work together during the recruitment
process to provide information about the startup package and, as
relevant, spousal/partner support, including the source(s) of financial
support. The units involved should clearly specify to what degree each
unit will provide support e.g., basic staff support, supplies, computers
and related IT support, professional development, travel, contract and
grant support, indirect cost sharing, etc.

4\. Unit administrators sharing a jointly appointed faculty member should
meet together with the faculty member to clarify performance
expectations, standards and criteria and as part of the annual
performance review process. Special consideration should be given to
managing expectations for governance/committee responsibilities and
teaching so jointly appointed faculty are not overwhelmed with the
demands of two or more departments.

5\. Unit administrators sharing jointly-appointed faculty should consult
with one another on market and merit salary adjustments, and coordinate
nominations for market adjustments. Sufficient time for discussion and
negotiation should be allowed. Deadlines for reappointment, promotion,
and tenure actions should also be coordinated.

6\. Unit administrators should clarify academic governance expectations
e.g., voting and/or committee assignments may be based on unit rules
that specify appointment thresholds for participation. University and
college academic governance expectations and eligibility also should be
clarified.

7\. Unit committees involved in the annual evaluation, merit pay
recommendation, and reappointment, promotion and tenure recommendations
of jointly-appointed faculty members must be informed of the agreed upon
expectations, standards, criteria, practices and procedures for
individual cases. The committees must accept that documents may differ
from unit procedures if those of the other unit are selected. Faculty
should not be required to prepare two different set of documents to
accommodate unit practices.

8\. If a mentoring committee is the practice in one of the joint academic
units, there should be a single mentoring committee with representatives
from each department, including, if possible, at least one faculty
member with joint appointment experience or a good understanding of what
is involved in joint appointments. If individual mentoring arrangements
exist in participating units, cross communication and collaboration
between mentors should be arranged.

9\. While jointly appointed faculty will generally have a single office
in the lead unit, consideration should be given to providing space in
the secondary unit(s), especially if the units are distant from one
another. This may be a laboratory or shared office space.

10\. When faculty are jointly appointed in two or more colleges,
deadlines for salary recommendations and submission of reappointment,
promotion and tenure documents may differ. Deans of colleges involved in
joint appointments should consult with each other and reach mutually
acceptable agreements regarding deadlines.

11\. Jointly appointed faculty should know who to contact if issues arise
and the joint appointment arrangements need to be reviewed and/or
clarified. Options to explore renegotiation of unit assignments and the
possibilities, if any, of terminating the joint appointment should be
identified.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

^1^This document is adapted from a statement prepared by the College of
Agriculture and Natural Resources.

^2^"Department" refers to any department, school or other academic unit
in which faculty and academic staff are appointed, including
appointments with and without pay.

6/24/15: Added \"clinical\" as a type of joint appointment.\
\
[Back to Faculty & Academic Staff Policies and
Procedures](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/fas-policies-procedures/index.html)
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/fas-policies-procedures/JointAppts.pcf)
