---
title: 'Outside Work for Pay: Frequently Asked Questions'
---

::: {#body}
Faculty Policies and Procedures

**Outside Work for Pay: Frequently Asked Questions**

 Last updated: 5/5/2006

Revisions to the Outside Work for Pay Policy (the \"Policy\") were
approved by the Board of Trustees on May 5, 2006. Academic Human
Resources has worked with the University Committee on Faculty Affairs to
prepare this list of frequently asked questions related to the Policy.

**1.   What standards govern an administrator\'s decision to grant or
deny a faculty member\'s request to engage in outside work for pay?**

The Policy provides that faculty members may request approval to engage
in outside work for pay if all of the following conditions exist:

1.  All approved outside work for pay and overload pay assignments for
    the faculty member will not exceed a total average of four days a
    month.
2.  The work in question will enhance the faculty member\'s expertise as
    a teacher and scholar in his/her discipline.
3.  The work will not interfere with the performance of the faculty
    member\'s University duties, including those non‑classroom
    responsibilities expected of all faculty members.
4.  The work will not adversely affect the University\'s interests or
    violate University policies or regulations.
5.  The work will be of a professional nature.

These conditions are required because the OWP Policy is not an
entitlement, nor is the policy intended to be a mechanism to merely
supplement a faculty member\'s salary. Rather, the policy is intended to
permit a member faculty to engage in outside activities that enhance
his/her expertise as a teacher and scholar but yet also remain
accessible to students, colleagues, and the public as part of the
faculty member\'s full-time professional efforts for the University. The
Policy establishes a presumption that if all of the above conditions are
met, approval to engage in outside work for pay will be granted.
Similarly, if all of the conditions are not met, the request should be
denied by the relevant department chair.

**2.   Must a faculty member report or obtain permission for outside
work for pay that is not related to his/her area of academic
expertise?**

No. The Policy only covers outside work in the general area of expertise
for which the faculty member is employed by the University. For example,
a chemistry professor who is compensated for playing the piano in a
local restaurant on Saturday night or who is paid to referee youth
soccer games does not need to obtain approval for or to report such work
under the Policy. However, faculty members\' outside activities (whether
paid or unpaid) may not interfere with the performance of their
University responsibilities. See question 11 below.

**3.  Are any paid scholarly activities related to a faculty member\'s
general area of expertise not regulated by this Policy?**

Yes. Section II of the Policy provides that certain normal scholarly
activities are expected of faculty and are not regulated by the Policy,
even if a faculty member is paid to do them by some outside entity.
Examples of such activities include presentations at professional
meetings; peer review of articles and grant proposals; preparation of
scholarly publications; leadership positions in professional societies;
service as editor of a scholarly journal; service on advisory committees
or evaluation panels for government agencies, foundations, or other
universities; and certain musical or other creative performances and
exhibitions, if there is an expectation in the faculty member\'s
discipline that he/she will engage in such performances or exhibitions.

The policy exception for \"presentations at professional meetings and
other similar gatherings\" is intended to cover meetings at which a
faculty member presents original research. It generally does not include
meetings sponsored by industry or other private organizations, even if
other professionals are in attendance. Presentations for the purpose of
providing continuing education to other professionals may fall within
this exception or within the definition of \"outside work\" depending on
all of the relevant facts and circumstances. It is the responsibility of
the relevant department chair, with input from the affected faculty
member, to determine which category specific commitments fall within.

**4.  What is a \"duty period?\"**

The duty period for faculty members on an AY appointment is the
nine-month period running from August 16th through May 15th of the
following calendar year. If a faculty member on an AY appointment
receives a summer assignment, the duration of the summer assignment is
also part of the duty period. The duty period for faculty members on an
AN appointment is the 12-month period running from August 16th through
August 15th of the following calendar year (or any other 12-month period
specified in the relevant appointment letter). During the duty period,
faculty members are expected to devote their full professional efforts
to the University, including weekends and evenings.

**5.  Why does the Policy require that faculty provide advance notice of
outside work for pay performed during non-duty periods?**

Outside work for pay performed during non-duty periods does not require
approval. Nevertheless, a faculty member must submit an Outside Work for
Pay form prior to engaging in outside work for pay during non-duty
periods to confirm that the outside work will not adversely affect the
University\'s interests, violate University policies or regulations, or
circumvent University policies or regulations that would apply if the
work was performed during the duty period. The unit administrator will
review the form to determine whether the faculty member\'s outside work
will involve any of the following: use of University facilities,
supplies, materials, or equipment; use of University intellectual
property; use of University employees; participation by or payment to
University students; research involving animals, human subjects, or
radioactive, hazardous, or other regulated materials.

**6.   Does the four day per month limit on outside work for pay include
evenings and weekends?**

Yes. During their duty periods, full-time faculty members are expected
to devote their full professional efforts to the University, including
weekends and evenings. Accordingly, outside work for pay performed
during the evening or weekend counts toward the total average of four
days per month allowed by the Policy.

Any portion of a day during which outside work for pay is conducted is
considered a \"day\" for purposes of the four day per month limit.

**7.   Does the Policy apply to faculty who are on a sabbatical or
terminal year consultantship?**

Yes. Faculty who are on an approved sabbatical or a terminal year
consultantship are eligible to perform outside work for pay pursuant to
the Policy.

**8.  Does the Policy apply to faculty members who hold part-time
appointments?**

Yes. The Policy applies to faculty members who hold appointments of at
least 50% time. Faculty with appointments of less than 50% time are not
covered by the Policy.

Part-time faculty with appointments between 50% and less than 100% may
engage in outside work for pay so long as that work is not performed
during the normal duty period. For example, a part-time faculty member
with a 60% appointment to work Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays may not
seek release time on those days to engage in outside work for pay. The
faculty member may, however, perform outside work for pay on his/her
non-scheduled days consistent with the provisions regarding outside work
for pay performed during non-duty periods. (See \#5 above).

**9. How is the ownership of intellectual property addressed by this
Policy?**

The Policy provides that the University\'s policies regarding
intellectual property are applicable to faculty members engaging in
outside work for pay. Questions about application of the University\'s
Development of Copyrighted Materials Policy and Patent Policy to outside
work for pay should be directed to the Office of Intellectual Property
at 355-2186.

**10. What is the difference between overload work and outside work for
pay?**

Overload work is an overload assignment related to teaching, research,
outreach, or academic/student support that represents a substantial
increase over regularly assigned duties and that is performed for the
University. Outside work for pay is any paid service or activity in the
general area of expertise for which the faculty member is employed by
the University that is performed for a person or entity other than the
University. Faculty may request approval to engage in overload pay
and/or outside work for pay up to a total average of four days per
month.

**11.  What is the interface between conflict of commitment principles
and the   Policy?**

A \"conflict of commitment\" occurs when the time and attention a
faculty member devotes to outside activities interferes with the
performance of his/her responsibilities to the University. When
involvement in outside work for pay substantially interferes with a
faculty member\'s performance of his/her University duties, the faculty
member\'s unit administrator may issue an administrative warning to the
faculty member or the faculty member and his/her unit administrator may
arrange by mutual agreement a voluntary unpaid leave of absence or a
reduction in the faculty member\'s appointment. The unit administrator
may also terminate approval for outside work for pay when a conflict of
commitment exists. Conflicts of commitment arising from outside
activities not covered by this Policy are addressed through normal
faculty review and/or disciplinary processes.

**12. Are faculty members required to disclose information about outside
work for pay that might be confidential or subject to a recognized
privilege, such as attorney-client or doctor-patient privilege?**

No. The approval process for outside work for pay requires only a
general description of the outside work to be performed. Confidential or
privileged information related to specific clients or underlying matters
need not be disclosed on the Outside Work for Pay form. For example, a
faculty member in the College of Law could request approval on the
Outside Work for Pay form to \"engage in outside work for pay providing
legal advice and services in the area of elder care law to residents at
area nursing homes and hospices.\" The information provided, however,
must be sufficient for the unit administrator to determine whether the
conditions described in the answer to question 1 above have been met,
and the administrator may seek additional information if he/she needs it
to make that determination.

**13.  Under what type of circumstances might approval for outside work
for pay be terminated?**

The Policy provides that approval for outside work for pay is subject to
termination at any time the University considers such action to be
advisable. Such termination might occur if circumstances have changed
and the outside work for pay no longer meets the conditions for approval
described in the answer to question 1 above. For example, approval might
be terminated when the outside work interferes with the performance of
the faculty member\'s duties or adversely affects the University\'s
interests or violates University policies.

**14.  How can a faculty member challenge the denial or termination of
approval to engage in outside work for pay?**

A faculty member may challenge a decision to deny or terminate approval
for outside work for pay through the Faculty Grievance Procedure if the
faculty member alleges that the denial is contrary to this Policy, to
another University policy, or to established practice, or that it is an
unfair application of this Policy.

**15.  How does the Policy relate to the University Practice Plan?**

Faculty in the Colleges of Human Medicine, Nursing, and Osteopathic
Medicine may engage in outside work for pay pursuant to the Policy.
However, outside work for pay that includes patient care or activities
significantly related to patient care is also subject to the University
Practice Plan. Questions about the University Practice Plan should be
directed to the MSU Health Team Administrator and the faculty member\'s
department chair.

Faculty in the College of Veterinary Medicine (\"CVM\") may engage in
outside work for pay pursuant to the Policy, provided that any private
veterinary practice by CVM faculty must also conform with applicable CVM
policies.

**16.  Does the Policy preclude a full-time faculty member from
simultaneously holding a faculty appointment at another college or
university?**

Yes. Full-time faculty members are compensated for full time
professional effort to the University. Simultaneously holding a faculty
appointment at another college or university is inconsistent with full
time employment at MSU and would generally constitute a conflict of
commitment. Moreover, accepting a faculty appointment at another college
or university would usually necessitate a commitment of more than an
average of four days per month.

Faculty who wish to teach on a more limited basis outside of MSU may
request to do so as outside work for pay. Faculty and department chairs
should be mindful that the policy prohibits faculty from engaging in
outside work that diverts research or teaching opportunities that might
reasonably be offered to the University or engaging in outside work that
competes with the University\'s programs.

Additional questions about the Policy may be directed to the Associate
Provost and Associate Vice President for Academic Human Resources at
355-5300.\
\
[Back to Faculty & Academic Staff Policies and
Procedures](https://www.hr.msu.edu/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/fas-policies-procedures/index.html)
:::

[©](http://a.cms.omniupdate.com/10?skin=oucampus&account=msuhr&site=Home&action=de&path=/policies-procedures/faculty-academic-staff/fas-policies-procedures/outsideworkFAQ.pcf)
